cross her shoulders and her overlarge sh

Kennit walked the tideline, heedless of the salt waves that washed around his boots as they licked the sandy beach clean of his tracks. He kept his eyes on the straggling line of seaweed, shells and snags of driftwood that marked the water’s highest reach. The tide was just turning now, the waves falling ever shorter in their pleading grasp upon the land. As the salt water retreated down the black sand, it would bare the worn molars of shale and tangles of kelp that now hid beneath the waves. On the other side of Others Island, his two-masted ship was anchored in Deception Cove. He had brought the Marietta in to anchor there as the morning winds had blown the last of the storm clean of the sky. The tide had still been rising then, the fanged rocks of the notorious cove grudgingly receding beneath frothy green lace. The ship’s gig had scraped over and between the barnacled rocks to put him and Gankis ashore on a tiny crescent of black sand beach that disappeared completely when storm winds drove the waves up past the high tide marks. Above, slate cliffs loomed, and evergreens so dark they were nearly black leaned precariously out in defiance of the prevailing winds. Even to Kennit’s iron nerves, it was like stepping into some creature’s half-open mouth. They’d left Opal, the ship’s boy, with the gig to protect it from the bizarre mishaps that so often befell unguarded craft in Deception Cove. Much to the boy’s unease, Kennit had commanded Gankis to come with him, leaving the boy and boat alone. At Kennit’s last sight, the boy had been perched in the beached boat. His eyes had alternated between fearful glances over his shoulder at the forested cliff-tops and staring anxiously out to where the Marietta strained against her anchors, yearning to join the racing current that swept past the mouth of the cove. The hazards of visiting this island were legendary. It was not just the hostility of the “best” anchorage on the island, nor the odd accidents known to befall ships and visitors. The whole of the island was enshrouded in the peculiar magic of the Others. Kennit had felt it tugging at him as he and Gankis followed the path that led from Deception Cove to the Treasure Beach. For a path seldom used, its black gravel was miraculously clean of fallen leaves or intruding plant life. About them the trees dripped the second-hand rain of last night’s storm onto fern fronds already burdened with crystal drops. The air was cool and alive. Brightly hued flowers, always growing at least a man’s length from the path, challenged the dimness of the shaded forest floor. Their scents drifted alluringly on the morning air as if beckoning the men to leave off their quest and explore their world. Less wholesome in appearance were the orange fungi that stair-stepped up the trunks of many of the trees. The shocking brilliance of their color spoke to Kennit of parasitic hungers. A spider’s web, hung like the ferns with fine droplets of shining water, stretched across their path, forcing them to duck under it. The spider that sat at the edges of its strands was as orange as the fungi, and nearly as big as a baby’s fist. A green tree-frog was enmeshed and struggling in the web’s sticky strands, but the spider appeared disinterested. Gankis made a small sound of dismay as he crouched to go beneath it. This path led right through the midst of the Others’ realm. Here was where the nebulous boundaries of their territory could be crossed by a man, did he dare to leave the well-marked path allotted to humans and step off into the forest to seek them. In ancient times, so the tales told, heroes came here, not to follow the path but to leave it deliberately, to beard the Others in their dens, and seek the wisdom of their cave-imprisoned goddess, or demand gifts such as cloaks of invisibility and swords that ran with flames and could shear through any shield. Bards that had dared to come this way had returned to their homelands with voices that could shatter a man’s ears with their power, or melt the heart of any listener with their skill. All knew the ancient tale of Kaven Ravenlock, who visited the Others for half a hundred years and returned as if but a day had passed for him, but with hair the color of gold and eyes like red coals and true songs that told of the future in twisted rhymes. Kennit snorted softly to himself. All knew such ancient tales, but if any man had ventured to leave this path in Kennit’s lifetime, he had told no other man about it. Perhaps he had never returned to brag of it. The pirate dismissed it from his mind. He had not come to the island to leave the path, but to follow it to its very end. And all knew what waited there as well. Kennit had followed the gravel path that snaked through the forested hills of the island’s interior until its winding descent spilled them out onto a coarsely grassed tableland that framed the wide curve of an open beach. This was the opposite shore of the tiny island. Legend foretold that any ship that anchored here had only the netherworld as its next port of call. Kennit had found no record of any ship that had dared challenge that rumor. If any had, its boldness had gone to hell with it. The sky was a clean brisk blue scoured clean of clouds by last night’s storm. The long curve of the rock and sand beach was broken only by a freshwater stream that cut its way through the high grassy bank backing the beach. The stream meandered over the sand to be engulfed in the sea. In the distance, higher cliffs of black shale rose, enclosing the far end of the crescent beach. One toothy tower of shale stood independent of the island, jutting out crookedly from the island with a small stretch of beach between it and its mother-cliff. The gap in the cliff framed a blue slice of sky and restless sea. Kennit paused to nudge the toe of his boot against a wrinkle in the wet sand. A glint of gold rewarded him. He stooped casually to hook his finger under a fine gold chain. As he drew it up, a locket popped out of its sandy grave. He wiped the locket down the front of his fine linen trousers, and then nimbly worked the tiny catch. The gold halves popped open. Saltwater had penetrated the edges of the locket, but the portrait of a young woman still smiled up at him, her eyes both merry and shyly rebuking. Kennit merely grunted at his find and put it in the pocket of his brocaded waistcoat. He lifted his pale eyes to look far up the tide line, squinting slightly as the morning sun dazzled off the moving waves. “Take yourself up to your sedgy cliffs, Gankis, and walk along them. Bring me whatever you find there.” “Yessir.” The older pirate trudged away. He
 gave one rueful backward glance at his young captain. Then he clambered agilely up the short bank to the deeply grassed tableland that fronted on the beach. He began to walk a parallel course, his eyes scanning the bank ahead of him. Almost immediately, he spotted something. He sprinted toward it, then lifted an object that flashed in the morning sunlight. He raised it up to the light and gazed at it, his seamed face lit with awe. “Sir, sir, you should see what I’ve found!” “I might be able to, did you bring it here to me as you were commanded,” Kennit observed irritably. Like a dog called to heel, Gankis made his way back to the captain. His brown eyes shone with a youthful sparkle, and he clutched the treasure in both hands as he leaped nimbly down the man-height drop to the beach. His low shoes kicked up sand as he ran. A brief frown creased Kennit’s brow as he watched Gankis advancing towards him. Although the old sailor was prone to fawn on him, he was no more inclined to share booty than any other man of his trade. Kennit had not truly expected Gankis willingly to bring to him anything he found on the grassy bank; in fact he had been rather anticipating divesting the man of his trove at the end of their stroll. To have Gankis hastening toward him, his face beaming as if he were a country yokel bringing his beloved milkmaid a posy, was positively unsettling. Nevertheless Kennit retained his customary sardonic smile, not allowing his face to betray his thoughts. It was a carefully rehearsed posture that suggested the languid grace of a hunting cat. It was not just that his greater height allowed him to look down on the seaman. By capturing his face in a pose of amusement, he suggested to his followers that they were incapable of surprising him. He wished his crew to believe that he could anticipate not only their every move, but their thoughts, too. A crew that believed that of their captain was less likely to become mutinous; and if they did, no one would wish to be the first to act. And so he kept his poise as Gankis raced across the sand to him. Moreover, he did not immediately snatch the treasure away from him, but allowed the man to hold it out to him while he, Kennit, gazed down at it in amusement. From the instant he saw it, it took all of Kennit’s control not to snatch at it. Never had he seen such a cunningly wrought bauble. It was a bubble of glass, an absolutely perfect sphere. The surface was not marred with so much as a scratch. The glass itself had a very faint blue cast to it, but the tint did not obscure the wonder within. Three tiny figurines, garbed in motley with painted faces, were fixed to a tiny stage and somehow linked to one another so that when Gankis shifted the ball in his hands, it sent them off into a series of actions. One pirouetted on his toes, while the next did a series of flips over a bar. The third bobbed his head in time to their actions, as if all three heard and responded to a merry tune trapped inside the ball with them. Kennit allowed Gankis to demonstrate it for him twice. Then, without a word, he extended a long-fingered hand towards him gracefully, and the sailor set the treasure in his palm. Kennit held his bemused smile firmly as he first lifted the ball to the sunlight, and then set the tumblers within to dancing for himself. The ball did not quite fill his hand. “A child’s plaything,” he surmised loftily. “If the child were the richest prince in the world,” Gankis dared to observe. “It’s too fragile a thing to give a kid to play with, sir. All it would take would be dropping it once …” “Yet it seems to have survived bobbing about in the waves of a storm, and then being flung up on a beach,” Kennit pointed out with measured good nature. “That’s true, sir, that’s true, but then this is the Treasure Beach. Almost everything cast up here is whole, from what I’ve heard tell. It’s part of the magic of this place.” “Magic.” Kennit permitted himself a slightly wider smile as he placed the orb in the roomy pocket of his indigo jacket. “So you believe it is magic that sweeps such trinkets up on this shore, do you?” “What else, Captain? By all rights, that should have been smashed to bits, or at least scoured by the sands. Yet it looks as if it just come out of a jeweler’s shop.” Kennit shook his head sadly. “Magic? No, Gankis, no more magic than the rip-tides in the Orte Shallows, or the Spice Current that speeds sailing ships on their journeys to the islands and taunts them all the way back. It’s but a trick of wind and current and tides. No more than that. The same trick that promises that any ship that tries to anchor off this side of the island will find herself beached and broken before the next tide.” “Yessir,” Gankis agreed dutifully, but without conviction. His traitorous eyes strayed to the pocket where Captain Kennit had stowed the glass ball. Kennit’s smile might have deepened fractionally. “Well? Don’t loiter here. Get back up there and walk the bank and see what else you find.” “Yessir,” Gankis conceded, and with one final regretful glance at the pocket, the older man turned and hastened back to the bank. Kennit slipped his hand into his pocket and caressed the smooth cold glass there. He resumed his stroll down the beach. Overhead, gulls followed his example, sliding slowly down the wind as they searched the retreating waves for tidbits. He did not hasten, but kept in mind that on the other side of the island, his ship was awaiting him in treacherous waters. He’d walk the whole length of the beach, as tradition decreed, but he had no intention of lingering after he had heard the sooth-saying of an Other. Nor did he have any intention of leaving whatever treasure he found. A true smile tugged at the corner of his mouth. As he strolled, he took his hand from his pocket and absently touched his opposite wrist. Concealed by the lacy cuff of his white silk shirt was a fine double thong of black leather. It bound a small wooden trinket tightly to his wrist. The ornament was a carved face, pierced at the brow and lower jaw so the face would be snugged firmly against his wrist, exactly over his pulse point. At one time, the face had been painted black, but most of that was worn away now. The features still stood out distinctly: a tiny mocking face, carved with exquisite care. Its visage was twin to his own. It had cost him an inordinate amount of coin to commission it. Not everyone who could carve wizardwood would, even if they had the balls to steal some. Kennit remembered well the artisan who had worked the tiny face for him. He’d sat for long hours in the man’s studio, washed in the cool morning light as the artist painstakingly worked the iron-hard wood to reflect Kennit’s features. They had not spoken. The artist could not. The pirate did not. The carver had needed absolute silence for his concentration, for he worked not only wood but a spell that would bind the charm to protect the wearer from enchantments. Kennit had had nothing to say to him anyway. The pirate had paid him an exorbitant advance months before, and waited until the artist had sent him a messenger to say that he had obtained some of the precious and jealously guarded wood. Kennit had been outraged when the artist had demanded still more money before he would begin the carving and spell-setting, but Kennit had only smiled his small sardonic smile, and put coins and jewels and silver and gold links on the artist’s scales until the man had nodded that his price had been met. Like many in Bingtown’s illicit trades, he had long ago sacrificed his own tongue to ensure his client’s privacy. While Kennit was not convinced of the efficacy of such a mutilation, he appreciated the sentiment it implied. So when the artist was finished and had personally bound the ornament to Kennit’s wrist, the man had only been able to nod vehemently his extreme satisfaction with his own skill as he touched the wood with avid fingertips. Afterwards Kennit had killed him. It was the only sensible thing to do, and Kennit was an eminently sensible man. He had taken back the extra fee the man had demanded. Kennit could not abide a man who would not honor his original bargain. But that had not been the reason he’d killed him. He’d killed him for the sake of keeping the secret. If men knew that Captain Kennit wore a charm to ward off enchantments, why, then they would believe that he feared them. He could not let his crew believe that he feared anything. His good luck was legendary. All the men who followed him believed in it, most more strongly than Kennit himself did. It was why they followed him. They must not ever think that he feared anything could threaten that luck. In the year since he had killed the artist, he had wondered if killing him had somehow harmed the charm, for it had not quickened. When he had originally asked the carver how long it would take for the little face to come to life, the man had shrugged eloquently, and indicated with much hand fluttering that neither he nor anyone else could predict such a thing. For a year Kennit had waited for the charm to quicken, to be sure that its spell was completely activated. But there had come a time when he could not wait any longer. He had known, on an instinctive level, that it was time for him to visit the Treasure Beach and see what fortune the ocean would wash up for him. He could wait no longer for the charm to awaken; he’d decided to take his chances. He’d have to once more trust his good luck to protect him, as it always had. It had protected him the day he’d had to kill the artist, hadn’t it? The man had turned unexpectedly, just in time to see Kennit drawing his blade. Kennit was convinced that if the man had had a tongue in his head, his scream would have been much louder. Kennit set the artist firmly out of his mind. This was no time to be thinking of
 him. He hadn’t come to the Treasure Beach to dwell on the past, but to find treasure to secure his future. He fixed his eyes on the undulating tideline and followed it down the beach. He ignored the glistening shells, the crab claws and tangles of uprooted seaweed and driftwood large and small. His pale blue eyes searched for jetsam and wreckage only. He did not have to go far to be rewarded. In a small battered wooden chest, he found a set of teacups. He did not think men had made them nor used them. There were twelve of them and they were made of hollowed-out ends of birds’ bones. Tiny blue pictures had been painted on them, the lines so fine that it looked as if the brush had been a single hair. The cups were well used. The blue pictures were faded beyond recognition of their original form and the carved bone handles were worn thin with use. He tucked the small case in the crook of his arm and walked on. He strode along under the sun and against the wind, his fine boots leaving clean tracks in the wet sand. Occasionally he lifted his gaze, casually, to scan the entire beach. He did not let his expectations show on his face. When he let his gaze drop to the sand, he discovered a tiny cedar box. Salt water had warped the wood. To open it he had to strike it on a rock like a nut. Inside were fingernails. They were fashioned of rich mother-of-pearl. Minute clamps would affix them on top of an ordinary nail and in the tip of each one was a tiny hollow, perhaps to store poison. There were twelve of them. Kennit put them into his other pocket. They rattled and clicked together as he walked. It did not distress him that what he had found was obviously neither of human make nor designed for human use. Although he had earlier mocked Gankis’ belief in the magic of the beach, all knew that more than one ocean’s waves brushed these rocky shores. Ships foolish enough to anchor anywhere off of this island during a squall were likely to disappear entirely, leaving not even a splinter of wreckage. Old sailors said they had been swept clean out of this world and into the seas of another one. Kennit did not doubt it. He glanced at the sky, but it remained clean and blue. The wind was crisp, but he had faith the weather would hold so that he could walk the Treasure Beach and then hike back across the island to where his ship waited at anchor in Deception Cove. He trusted his luck to hold. His most unsettling discovery came next. It was a bag made of red and blue leather stitched together, half buried in the wet sand. The leather was stout, the bag meant to last. Salt water had soaked and stained it, bleeding the colors into one another. The brine had seized up the brass buckles that had secured it and stiffened the leather straps that went through them. He used his knife to rip open a seam. Inside was a litter of kittens, perfectly formed with long claws and iridescent patches behind their ears. They were dead, all six of them. Quelling his distaste, he picked up the smallest. He turned the limp body over in his hands. It was blue-furred, a deep periwinkle blue with pink-lidded eyes. Small. The runt, most likely. It was sodden and cold and disgusting. A ruby earring like a fat tick decorated one of the wet ears. He longed to simply drop it. Ridiculous. He plucked the earring free and dropped it in his pocket. Then, moved by an impulse he did not understand, he returned the small blue bodies to the bag and left it beside the tideline. Kennit walked on. Awe flowed through him with his blood. Tree. Bark and sap, the scent of the wood and the leaves fluttering overhead. Tree. But also the soil and the water, the air and the light, all was coming and going through the being known as tree. He moved with them, sliding in and out of an existence of bark and leaf and root, air and water. “Wintrow.” The boy lifted his eyes slowly from the tree before him. With an effort of will, he focused his gaze on the smiling face of the young priest. Berandol nodded in encouragement. Wintrow closed his eyes for an instant, held his breath, and pulled himself free of his task. When he opened his eyes, he took a sudden breath as if breaking clear of deep water. Dappling light, sweet water, soft wind all faded abruptly. He was in the monastery work room, a cool hall walled and floored with stone. His bare feet were chill against the floor. There were a dozen other slab tables in the big room. At three others, boys like himself worked slowly, their dreamlike movements indicative of their tranced state. One wove a basket and two others shaped clay with wet gray hands. He looked down at the pieces of gleaming glass and lead on the table before him. The beauty of the stained-glass image he had pieced together astonished even him, yet it still could not touch the wonder of having been the tree. He touched it with his fingers, tracing the trunk and the graceful branches. Caressing the image was like touching his own body; he knew it that well. Behind him he heard the soft intake of Berandol’s breath. In his state of still-heightened awareness, he could feel the priest’s awe flowing with his own, and for a time they stood quietly, glorying together in the wonder of Sa. “Wintrow,” the priest repeated softly. He reached out and traced with a finger the tiny dragon that peered from the tree’s upper branches, then touched the glistening curve of a serpent’s body, all but hidden in the twisting roots. He put a hand on the boy’s shoulders and turned him gently away from his worktable. As he steered him from the workroom, he rebuked him gently. “You are too young to sustain such a state for the whole morning. You must learn to pace yourself.” Wintrow lifted his hands to knuckle at eyes that were suddenly sandy. “I’ve been in there all morning?” he asked dazedly. “It did not seem like it, Berandol.” “I am sure it did not. Yet I am sure the weariness you feel now will convince you it is so. One must be careful, Wintrow. Tomorrow, ask a watcher to stir you at mid-morning. Talent such as you possess is too precious to allow you to burn it out.” “I do ache, now,” Wintrow conceded. He ran his hand over his brow, pushing fine black hair from his eyes and smiled. “But the tree was worth it, Berandol.” Berandol nodded slowly. “In more ways than one. The sale of such a window will yield enough coin to re-roof the novitiates’ hall. If Mother Dellity can bring herself to let the monastery part with such a thing of wonder.” He hesitated a moment, then added, “I see they appeared again. The dragon and the serpent. You still have no idea …” he let his voice trail away questioningly. “I do not even have a recollection of putting them there,” Wintrow said. “Well.” There was no trace of judgment in Berandol’s voice. Only patience. For a time they walked in companionable silence through the cool stone hallways of the monastery. Slowly Wintrow’s senses lost their edge and faded to a normal level. He could no longer taste the scents of the salts trapped in the stone walls, nor hear the minute settling of the ancient blocks of stone. The rough brown bure of his novice robes became bearable against his skin. By the time they reached the great wooden door and stepped out into the monastery gardens, he was safely back in his body. He felt groggy as if he had just awakened from a long sleep, yet as bone weary as if he had hoed potatoes all day. He walked silently beside Berandol as monastery custom dictated. They passed others, some men and women robed in the green of full priesthood and others dressed in white as acolytes. Greetings were exchanged as nods. As they neared the tool shed, he felt a sudden unsettling certainty that they were going there and that he would spend the rest of the afternoon working in the sunny garden. Any other time, it might have been a pleasant thing to look forward to, but his recent efforts in the dim work room had left his eyes sensitive to light. Berandol glanced back at his lagging step. “Wintrow,” he chided softly. “Refuse the anxiety. When you borrow trouble against what might be, you neglect the moment you have now to enjoy. The man who worries about what will next be happening to him loses this moment in dread of the next, and poisons the next with pre-judgment.” Berandol’s voice took on an edge of hardness. “You indulge in pre-judgment too often. If you are refused the priesthood, it will most likely be for that.” Wintrow’s eyes flashed to Berandol’s in horror. For a moment stark desolation dominated his face. Then he saw the trap. His face broke into a grin, and Berandol’s answered it when the boy said, “But if I fret about it, I shall have pre-judged myself to failure.” Berandol gave the slender boy a good-natured shove with his elbow. “Exactly. Ah, you grow and learn so fast. I was much older than you, twenty at least, before I learned to apply that Contradiction to daily life.” Wintrow shrugged sheepishly. “I was meditating on it last night before I fell asleep. ‘One must plan for the future and anticipate the future without fearing the future.’ The Twenty-Seventh Contradiction of Sa.” “Thirteen years old is very young to have reached the Twenty-Seventh Contradiction,” Berandol observed. “What one are you on?” Wintrow asked artlessly. “The Thirty-Third. The same one I’ve been on for the last two years.” Wintrow gave a small shrug of his shoulders. “I haven’t studied that far yet.” They walked in the shade of apple trees, under leaves hanging limp in the heat of the day. Ripening fruit weighted the boughs. At the other end of the orchard, acolytes moved in patterns through the trees, bearing buckets of water from the stream. “ ‘A priest should not presume to judge unless he can judge as Sa does; with absolute justice and absolute mercy.’ ” Berandol shook his head. “I confess, I do not see how that is possible.” The boy’s eyes were already turned inward,
 with only the slightest line to his brow. “As long as you believe it is impossible, you close your mind to understanding it.” His voice seemed far away. “Unless, of course, that is what we are meant to discover. That as priests we cannot judge, for we have not the absolute mercy and absolute justice to do so. Perhaps we are only meant to forgive and give solace.” Berandol shook his head. “In the space of a few moments, you slice through as much of the knot as I had done in six months. But then I look about me, and I see many priests who do judge. The Wanderers of our order do little except resolve differences for folk. So they must have somehow mastered the Thirty-Third Contradiction.” The boy looked up at him curiously. He opened his mouth to speak and then blushed and shut it again. Berandol glanced down at his charge. “Whatever it is, go ahead and say it. I will not rebuke you.” “The problem is, I was about to rebuke you,” Wintrow confessed. The boy’s face brightened as he added, “But I stopped myself before I did.” “And you were going to say to me?” Berandol pressed. When the boy shook his head, his tutor laughed aloud. “Come, Wintrow, having asked you to speak your thought, do you think I would be so unfair as to take offense at your words? What was in your mind?” “I was going to tell you that you should govern your behavior by the precepts of Sa, not by what you see others doing.” The boy spoke forthrightly, but then lowered his eyes. “I know it is not my place to remind you of that.” Berandol looked too deep in thought to have taken offense. “But if I follow the precept alone, and my heart tells me it is impossible for a man to judge as Sa does, with absolute justice and absolute mercy, then I must conclude …” His words slowed as if the thought came reluctantly. “I must conclude that either the Wanderers have much greater spiritual depth than I. Or that they have no more right to judge than I do.” His eyes wandered among the apple trees. “Could it be that an entire branch of our order exists without righteousness? Is not it disloyal even to think such a thing?” His troubled glance came back to the boy at his side. Wintrow smiled serenely. “If a man’s thoughts follow the precepts of Sa, they cannot go astray.” “I shall have to think more on this,” Berandol concluded with a sigh. He gave Wintrow a look of genuine fondness. “I bless the day you were given me as student, though in truth I often wonder who is student and who is teacher here. I shall miss you.” Sudden alarm filled Wintrow’s eyes. “Miss me? Are you leaving, have you been called to duty so soon?” “Not I. I should have given you this news better, but as always your words have led my thoughts far from their starting point. I am not leaving, but you. It was why I came to find you today, to bid you pack, for you are called home. Your grandmother and mother have sent word that they fear your grandfather is dying. They would have you near at such a time.” At the look of devastation on the boy’s face, Berandol added, “I am sorry to have told you so bluntly. You so seldom speak of your family. I did not realize you were close to your grandfather.” “I am not,” Wintrow simply admitted. “Truth to tell, I scarcely know him. When I was small, he was always at sea. At the times when he was home, he always terrified me. Not with cruelty, but with … power. Everything about him seemed too large for the room, from his voice to his beard. Even when I was small and overheard other folk talking about him, it was as if they spoke of a legend or a hero. I don’t recall that I ever called him Grandpa, nor even Grandfather. When he came home, he’d blow through the house like the North Wind and mostly I took shelter from his presence rather than enjoyed it. When I was dragged out before him, all I can recall was that he found fault with my growth. ‘Why is the boy so puny?’ he’d demand. ‘He looks just like my boys, but half the size! Don’t you feed him meat? Doesn’t he eat well?’ Then he would pull me near and feel my arm, as if I were being fattened for the table. I always felt ashamed of my size, then, as if it were a fault. Since I was given over to the priesthood, I have seen even less of him, but my impression of him has not changed. Still, it is not my grandfather I dread, nor even keeping his death watch. It’s going home, Berandol. It is so … noisy.” Berandol grimaced in sympathy. “I don’t believe I even learned to think until I came here,” Wintrow continued. “There, it was too noisy and too busy. I never had time to think. From the time Nana rousted us out of bed in the morning until we were bathed, gowned and dumped back in bed at night, we were in motion. Being dressed and taken on outings, having lessons and meals, visiting friends, being dressed differently and having more meals … it was endless. You know, when I first got here, I didn’t leave my cell for the first two days. Without Nana or Grandma or Mother chasing me about, I had no idea what to do with myself. And for so long, my sister and I had been a unit. ‘The children’ need their nap, ‘the children’ need their lunch. I felt I’d lost half my body when they separated us.” Berandol was grinning in appreciation. “So that is what it is like, to be a Vestrit. I’d always wondered how the children of the Old Traders of Bingtown lived. For me, it was very different, and yet much the same. We were swineherds, my family. I had no nanny or outings, but there were always chores aplenty to keep one busy. Looking back, we spent most of our time simply surviving. Stretching out the food, fixing things long past fixing by anyone else’s standards, caring for the swine … I think the pigs received better care than anyone else. There was never even a thought of giving up a child for the priesthood. Then my mother became ill, and my father made a promise that if she lived, he would dedicate one of his children to Sa. So when she lived, they sent me off. I was the runt of the litter, so to speak. The youngest surviving child, and with a stunted arm. It was a sacrifice for them, I am sure, but not as great as giving up one of my strapping older brothers.” “A stunted arm?” Wintrow asked in surprise. “It was. I’d fallen on it when I was small, and it was a long time healing, and when it did heal, it was never as strong as it should have been. But the priests cured me. They put me with the watering crew on the orchard, and the priest in charge of us gave me mismatched buckets. He made me carry the heavier one with my weaker arm. I thought he was a madman at first; my parents had always taught me to use my stronger arm for everything. It was my earliest introduction to Sa’s precepts.” Wintrow frowned to himself for a moment, then grinned. “ ‘For the weakest has but to try his strength to find it, and then he shall be strong.’ ” “Exactly.” The priest gestured at the long low building before them. The acolyte’s cells had been their destination. “The messenger was delayed getting here. You will have to pack swiftly and set out right away if you are to reach port before your ship sails. It’s a long walk.” “A ship!” The desolation that had faded briefly from Wintrow’s face flooded back. “I hadn’t thought of that. I hate traveling by sea. But when one must go from Jamaillia to Bingtown, there is no other choice.” His frown deepened. “Walk to port? Didn’t they arrange a man and a horse for me?” “Do you so quickly revive to the comforts of wealth, Wintrow?” Berandol chided him. When the boy hung his head, abashed, he went on, “No, the message said that a friend had offered you passage across and the family had been glad to accept it.” More gently he added, “I suspect that money is not so plentiful for your family as it once was. The Northern War has hurt many of the trading families, both in the goods that never came down the Buck River and those that never were sold there.” More pensively, he went on, “And our young Satrap does not favor Bingtown as his father and grandfathers did. They seemed to feel that those brave enough to settle the Cursed Shores should share generously in the treasures they found there. But not young Cosgo. It is said that he feels they have reaped the reward of their risk-taking long enough, that the Shores are well settled and whatever curse was once there is now dispersed. He has not only sent them new taxes but has parceled out new grants of land near Bingtown to some of his favorites.” Berandol shook his head. “He breaks the word of his ancestor, and causes hardship for folk who have always kept their word with him. No good can come of this.” “I know. I should be grateful I am not afoot all the way. But it is hard, Berandol, to accept a journey to a destination I dread, let alone by ship. I shall be miserable the whole way.” “Sea-sick?” Berandol asked in some surprise. “I did not think it afflicted those of seafaring stock.” “The right weather can sour any man’s stomach, but no, that is not it. It’s the noise and the rushing about and the crowded conditions. The smell. And the sailors. Good enough men in their own way but …” the boy shrugged. “Not like us. They haven’t the time to talk about the things we speak of here, Berandol. And if they did, their thoughts would likely be as basic as that of the youngest acolyte. They live as animals do, and reason as animals. I shall feel as if I am living among beasts. Through no faults of their own,” he added at seeing the young priest frown. Berandol took a breath as if to launch into speech, then reconsidered it. After a moment, he said thoughtfully, “It has been two years since you have visited your parents’ home, Wintrow. Two years since you last were out of the monastery and about working folk. Look and listen well, and when you come back to us, tell me if you still agree with what you have just said. I charge you to remember this, for I shall.” “I shall, Berandol,”
 the youth promised sincerely. “And I shall miss you.” “Probably, but not for some days, for I am to escort you on your journey down to the port. Come. Let’s go and pack.” Long before kennit reached the end of the beach, he was aware of the Other watching him. He had expected this, yet it intrigued him, for he had often heard they were creatures of the dawn and the dusk, seldom moving about while the sun was still in the sky. A lesser man might have been afraid, but a lesser man would not have possessed Kennit’s luck. Or his skill with a sword. He continued his leisurely stroll down the beach, all the while gathering plunder. He feigned unawareness of the creature watching him, yet he was eerily certain that it knew of his deceit. A game within a game, he told himself, and smiled secretly. He was immensely irritated when, a few moments later, Gankis came lolloping down the beach to wheeze out the news that there was an Other up there watching him. “I know,” he told the old sailor with asperity. An instant later he had regained control of his voice and features. In a kindly tone, he explained, “And it knows that we know it is watching us. That being so, I suggest you ignore it, as I do, and finish searching your bank. Have you found anything else of note?” “A few things,” Gankis admitted, not pleased. Kennit straightened and waited. The sailor dug into the capacious pockets of his worn coat. “There’s this,” he said as he reluctantly drew an object of brightly painted wood from his pocket. It was an arrangement of disks and rods with circular holes in some of the disks. Kennit found it incomprehensible. “A child’s toy of some kind,” he deemed it. He raised his eyebrow at Gankis and waited. “And this,” the seaman conceded. He took a rose bud from his pocket. Kennit took it from him carefully, wary of the thorns. He had actually believed it real until the moment that he held it and found the stem stiff and unyielding. He hefted it in his hand; it was as light as a real rose would be. He turned it, trying to decide what it was made from: he concluded it was nothing he had ever seen before. Even more mysterious than its structure was its fragrance, as warm and spicy as if it were a full-blown rose from a summer garden. Kennit raised one eyebrow at Gankis as he fastened the rose to the lapel of his jacket. The barbed thorns held it securely. Kennit watched Gankis’ lips fold tight, but the seaman dared no words. Kennit glanced at the sun, and then at the ebbing waves. It would take them over an hour to walk back to the other side of the island. He could not stay much longer without risking his ship on the rocks exposed by the retreating tide. A rare moment of indecision clouded his thoughts. He had not come to the Treasure Beach for treasure alone; he had come instead seeking the oracle of the Other, confident that the Other would choose to speak to him. He needed the confirmation of the oracle; was not that why he had brought Gankis with him to witness? Gankis was one of the few men aboard his ship who did not routinely embroider his own adventures. He knew that not only his own crew members but any pirate at Divvytown would accept Gankis’ account as true. Besides. If the oracle that Gankis witnessed did not suit Kennit’s purposes, he’d be an easy man to kill. Once again he considered the amount of time left to him. A prudent man would stop his search of the beach now, confront the Other, and then hasten back to his ship. Prudent men never trusted their luck. But Kennit had long ago decided that a man had to trust his luck in order for it to grow. It was a personal belief, one he had discovered for himself and saw no reason to share with anyone else. He had never achieved any major triumph without taking a chance and trusting his luck. Perhaps the day he became prudent and cautious, his luck would take insult and desert him. He smirked to himself as he concluded that would be the one chance he would not take. He would never trust to luck that his luck would not desert him. This convolution of logic pleased him. He continued his leisurely search of the tideline. As he neared the toothy rocks that marked the end of the crescent beach, every one of his senses prickled with awareness of the Other. The smell of it was alluringly sweet, and then abruptly it became rancidly rotten when the wind changed and brought it stronger. The scent was so strong it became a taste in the back of his throat, one that almost gagged him. But it was not just the smell of the beast; Kennit could feel its presence against his skin. His ears popped and he felt its breathing as a pressure on his eyeballs and on the skin of his throat. He did not think he perspired, yet his face suddenly felt greasy with sweat, as if the wind had carried some substance from the Other’s skin and pasted it onto his. Kennit fought distaste that bordered on nausea. He refused to let that weakness show. Instead he drew himself up to his full height and unobtrusively straightened his waistcoat. The wind stirred both the plumes on his hat and the gleaming black locks of his hair. Generally speaking, he cut a fine figure, and drew a great deal of power from knowing that both men and women were impressed by him. He was tall, but muscled proportionately. The tailoring of his coat showed off the breadth of his shoulders and chest and the flatness of his belly. His face pleased him, too. He felt he was a handsome man. He had a high brow, a firm jaw and a straight nose over finely drawn lips. His beard was fashionably pointed, the ends of his mustache meticulously waxed. His only feature that displeased him were his eyes: they were his mother’s eyes, pale and watery and blue. When he encountered their stare in a looking-glass, she looked out of them at him, distressed and teary at his dissolute ways. They seemed to him the vacuous eyes of an idiot, out of place in his tanned face. In another man, folk would have said he had mild blue eyes, inquiring eyes. Kennit strove to cultivate a cold blue stare, but knew his eyes were too pale even for that. He augmented the effort with a slight curl of his lip as he let his eyes come to rest on the waiting Other. It seemed little impressed. It returned his stare from a height near equal to his own. It was oddly reassuring to find how accurate the legends were. The webbed fingers and toes, the obvious flexibility of the limbs, the flat fish eyes in their cartilaginous sockets, even the supple scaled skin that covered the creature were all as Kennit had expected. Its blunt, bald head was mis-shapen, neither that of a human nor a fish. The hinge of its jaw was under its ear holes, anchoring a mouth large enough to engulf a man’s head. Its thin lips could not conceal the rows of tiny sharp teeth. Its shoulders seemed to slump forward, but the posture suggested brute strength rather than slovenliness. It wore a garment somewhat like a cloak, of a pale azure, and the weave was so fine that it had no more texture than a flower petal. It draped the Other in a way that suggested the fluidity of water. Yes, all was as he had read of it. What he had not expected was the attraction he felt. Some trick of the wind had lied to his nose. This creature’s scent was like a summer garden, the air of its breath the subtle bouquet of a rare wine. All wisdom resided in those unreadable eyes. He suddenly longed to distinguish himself before it and be deemed worthy of its regard. He wanted to impress it with his goodness and intelligence. He longed for it to think well of him. He heard the slight crunch of Gankis’ footfalls on the sand behind him. For an instant, the Other’s attention wavered. The flat eyes slid away from contemplating Kennit and in that moment the glamour was broken. Kennit almost startled. Then he crossed his arms on his chest so that the wizardwood face pressed into his flesh securely. Quickened or not, it had seemed to work, holding off the creature’s enchantment. And now that he was aware of the Other’s intent, he could hold his will firm against such manipulation. Even when its eyes darted back to lock with Kennit’s gaze, he could see the Other for what it was: a cold and squamous creature of the deep. It seemed to sense it had lost its hold on him, for when it filled the air pouches behind its jaws and belched its words at him, Kennit sensed a trace of sarcasm. “Welcome, pilgrim. The sea has well rewarded your search, I see. Will you make a goodwill offering, and hear the oracle speak the significance of your finds?” Its voice creaked like unoiled hinges as it wheezed and gasped words at him. A part of Kennit admired the effort it must have taken for it to learn to shape human words, but the harder side of him dismissed it as a servile act. Here was this creature, foreign in every way to his humanity. He stood before it, on its own territory, and yet it waited upon him, speaking in his tongue, begging alms in exchange for its prophecies. Yet if it recognized him as superior, why was there sarcasm in its voice? Kennit dismissed the question from his mind. He reached for his purse, and took from it the two gold bits that were the customary offering. Despite his earlier dissembling with Gankis, he had researched exactly what he might expect. Good luck works best when it is not surprised. So he was unruffled when the Other extended a stiff, grayish tongue to receive the coins, and he did not shrink from placing them there. The creature jerked its tongue back into its maw. If it did aught with the gold other than swallow it, Kennit could not tell. That done, the Other gave a stiff sort of bow, and then smoothed a fan of sand to receive the objects Kennit had gathered. Kennit took his time in spreading them out before it. He set down first the glass ball with the tumblers within it. Beside it he placed the rose, and then he carefully arranged
 the twelve fingernails around it. At the end of the arc he placed the small chest with the tiny cups in it. A handful of small crystal spheres he nested in a hollow. He had gathered them on the final stretch of beach. Beside them he set his final find, a copper feather that seemed to weigh little more than a real one. He gave a nod that he was finished and stepped back slightly. With an apologetic glance at his captain, Gankis shyly placed the painted wooden toy to one side of the arc. Then he, too, stood back. The Other looked for a time at the fan of treasures before it. Then it lifted its oddly flat eyes to meet Kennit’s blue stare. It finally spoke. “This is all you found?” The emphasis was unmistakable. Kennit made a tiny movement of his shoulders and head, a movement that might mean yes or no, or nothing at all. He did not speak. Gankis shifted his feet about uncomfortably. The Other refilled its air sacs noisily. “That which the ocean washes up here is not for the keeping of men. The water brings it here because here is where the water wishes it to be. Do not set yourself against the will of the water, for no wise creature does that. No human is permitted to keep what he finds upon the Treasure Beach.” “Does it belong to the Other, then?” Kennit asked calmly. Despite the difference in species, it was still easy for Kennit to see he had disconcerted the Other. It took a moment to recover, then answered gravely, “What the ocean washes up upon the Treasure Beach belongs always to the ocean. We are but caretakers here.” Kennit’s smile stretched his lips tight and thin. “Well then, you need have no concern. I’m Captain Kennit, and I’m not the only one who will tell you that all the ocean is mine to rove. So all that belongs to the ocean is mine as well. You’ve had your gold, now speak your prophecy, and take no more care for that which does not belong to you.” Beside him Gankis gasped audibly, but the Other gave no sign of reacting to these words. Instead it bowed its head gravely, inclining its neckless body toward him, almost as if compelled to acknowledge Kennit as its master. Then it lifted its head and its fish eyes found Kennit’s soul as unerringly as a finger on a chart. When it spoke there was a deeper note to its voice, as if the words were blown up from deep inside it. “So plain this telling that even one of your spawn could read it. You take that which is not yours, Captain Kennit, and claim it as your own. No matter how much falls into your hands, you are never sated. Those that follow you must be content with what you have cast off as gew-gaws and toys, while you take what you perceive as most valuable and keep it for yourself.” The creature’s eyes darted briefly to lock with Gankis’ goggling stare. “In his evaluations, you are both deceived, and both made the poorer.” Kennit did not care at all for the direction of this sooth-saying. “My gold has bought me the right to ask one question, has it not?” he demanded boldly. The Other’s jaw dropped open wide—not in astonishment, but perhaps as a sort of threat. The rows of teeth were indeed impressive. Then it snapped shut. The thin lips barely stirred as it belched out its answer. “Yesss.” “Shall I succeed in what I aspire?” The Other’s air sacs pulsed speculatively. “You do not wish to make your question more specific?” “Do the omens need me to be more specific?” Kennit asked with tolerance. The Other glanced down at the array of objects again: the rose, the cups, the nails, the tumblers inside the ball, the feather, the crystal spheres. “You will succeed in your heart’s desire,” it said succinctly. A smile began to dawn on Kennit’s face but faded as the creature continued, his tone growing more ominous. “That which you are most driven to do, you will accomplish. That task, that feat, that deed which haunts your dreams will blossom in your hands.” “Enough,” Kennit growled, suddenly hasty. He abandoned any thought of asking for an audience with their goddess. This was as far as he wished to press their sooth-saying. He stooped to retrieve the prizes on the sand, but the creature suddenly fanned out its long-fingered webbed hands and spread them protectively above the treasures. A drop of venom welled greenly to the tip of each digit. “The treasures, of course, will remain on the Treasure Beach. I will see to their placement.” “Why, thank you,” Kennit said, his voice melodic with sincerity. He straightened slowly, but as the creature relaxed its guard, he suddenly stepped forward, planting his foot firmly on the glass ball with the tumblers inside. It gave way with a tinkle like wind chimes. Gankis cried out as if Kennit had slain his first-born and even the Other recoiled at the wanton destructiveness. “A pity,” Kennit observed as he turned away. “But if I cannot possess it, why should anyone?” Wisely, he forbore a similar treatment for the rose. He suspected its delicate beauty was created from some material that would not give way to his boot’s pressure. He did not wish to lose his dignity by attempting to destroy it and failing. The other objects had small value in his regard; the Other could do whatever it wished with such flotsam. He turned and strode away. Behind him he heard the Other hiss its wrath. It took a long breath, then intoned, “The heel that destroys that which belongs to the sea shall be claimed in turn by the sea.” Its toothy jaws shut with a snap, biting off this last prophecy. Gankis immediately moved to flank Kennit. That one would always prefer the known danger to the unknown. Half a dozen strides down the beach, Kennit halted and turned. He called back to where the Other still crouched over the treasures. “Oh, yes, there was one other omen that perhaps you might wish to consider. But methinks the ocean washed it to you, not me, and thus I left it where it was. It is well-known, I believe, that the Others have no love for cats?” Actually, their fear and awe of anything feline was almost as legendary as their ability to sooth-say. The Other did not deign to reply, but Kennit had the satisfaction of seeing its air sacs puff with alarm. “You’ll find them up the beach. A whole litter of kits for you, with very pretty blue coats. They were in a leather bag. Seven or eight of the pretty little creatures. Most of them looked a bit poorly after their dip in the ocean, but no doubt those I let out will fare well. Do remember they belong, not to you, but the ocean. I’m sure you’ll treat them kindly.” The Other made a peculiar sound, almost a whistle. “Take them!” it begged. “Take them away, all of them. Please!” “Take away from the Treasure Beach that which the ocean saw fit to bring here? I would not dream of it,” Kennit assured him with vast sincerity. He did not laugh, nor even smile as he turned away from its evident distress. He did find himself humming the tune to a rather bawdy song currently popular in Divvytown. The length of his stride was such that Gankis was soon puffing again as he trotted along beside him. “Sir?” Gankis gasped. “A question if I might, Captain Kennit?” “You may ask it,” Kennit granted him graciously. He half expected the man to ask him to slow down. That he would refuse. They must make all haste back to the ship if they were to work her out to sea before the rocks emerged from the retreating tide. “What is it that you’ll succeed in doing?” Kennit opened his mouth, almost tempted to tell the man. But no. He had schemed this too carefully, staged it all in his mind too often. He’d wait until they were underway and Gankis had had plenty of time to tell all the crew his version of events on the island. He doubted that would take long. The old hand was garrulous, and after their absence the men would be eaten with curiosity about their visit to the island. Once they had the wind in their sails and were fairly back on their way to Divvytown, then he’d call all hands up on deck. His imagination began to carry him, and he pictured the moon shining down on him as he spoke to the men gathered below him in the waist. His pale blue eyes kindled with the glow of his own imaginings. They traversed the beach much faster than they had when they were seeking treasure. In a short time they were climbing the steep trail that led up from the shore and through the wooded interior of the island. He kept well concealed from Gankis the anxiety he felt for the Marietta. The tides in the cove both rose and fell with an extremity that paid no attention to the phases of the moon. A ship believed to be safely anchored in the cove might abruptly find her hull grinding against rocks that surely had not been there at the last low tide. Kennit would take no chances with his Marietta; they’d be well away from this sorcerous place before the tide could strand her. Away from the wind of the beach and in the shelter of the trees, the day was still and golden. The warmth of the slanting sunlight through the open-branched trees combined with the rising scents of the forest loam to make the day enticingly sleepy. Kennit felt his stride slowing as the peace of the golden place seeped into him. Earlier, when the branches had been dripping with the aftermath of the storm’s rain, the forest had been uninviting, a dank wet place full of brambles and slapping branches. Now he knew with unflagging certainty that the forest was a place of marvels. It had treasures and secrets every bit as tantalizing as those the Treasure Beach had offered. His urgency to reach the Marietta peeled away from him and was discarded. He found himself standing still in the middle of the pebbled pathway. Today he would explore the island. To him would be opened the wonder-filled fey places of the Other, where a man might pass a hundred years in a single sublime night. Soon he would know and master it all. But for now it was enough to stand still and breathe the golden air of this
 place. Nothing intruded on his pleasure, save Gankis. The man persisted in chattering warnings about the tide and the Marietta. The more Kennit ignored him, the more he pelted him with questions. “Why have we stopped here, Captain Kennit? Sir? Are you feeling well, sir?” He waved a dismissive hand at the man, but the old tar paid it no attention. He cast about for some errand that would take the noisy, smelly man from his presence. As he groped in his pockets, his hand encountered the locket and chain. He smiled slyly to himself as he drew it out. He interrupted whatever it was Gankis was blithering about. “Ah, this will never do. See what I’ve accidentally carried off from their beach. Be a good lad now, and run this back to the beach for me. Give it to the Other and see it puts it safely away.” Gankis gaped at him. “There isn’t time. Leave it here, sir! We’ve got to get back to the ship, before she’s on the rocks or they have to leave without us. There won’t be another tide that will let her back into Deception Cove for a month. And no man survives a night on this island.” The man was beginning to get on his nerves. His loud voice had frightened off a tiny green bird that had been on the point of alighting nearby. “Go, I told you. Go!” He put whips and fetters into his voice, and was relieved when the old sea-dog snatched the locket from his hand and dashed back the way they had come. Once he was out of sight, Kennit grinned widely to himself. He hastened up the path into the island’s hilly interior. He’d put some distance between himself and where he’d left Gankis, and then he’d leave the trail. Gankis would never find him, he’d be forced to leave without him, and then all the wonders of the Others’ island would be his. “Not quite. You would be theirs.” It was his own voice speaking, in a tiny whisper so soft that even Kennit’s keen ears barely heard it. He moistened his lips and looked about himself. The words had shivered through him like a sudden awakening. He’d been about to do something. What? “You were about to put yourself into their hands. Power flows both ways on this path. The magic encourages you to stay upon it, but it cannot be worked to appeal to a human without also working to repel the Other. The magic that keeps their world safe from you also protects you as long as you do not stray from the path. If they persuade you to leave the path, you’ll be well within their reach. Not a wise move.” He lifted his wrist to a level with his eyes. His own miniature face grinned mockingly back at him. With the charm’s quickening, the wood had taken on colors. The carved ringlets were as black as his own, the face as weathered, and the eyes as deceptively weak a blue. “I had begun to think you a bad bargain,” Kennit said to the charm. The face gave a snort of disdain. “If I am a bad bargain to you, you are as much a one to me,” it pointed out. “I was beginning to think myself strapped to the wrist of a gullible fool, doomed to almost immediate destruction. But you seem to have shaken the effect of the spell. Or rather, I have cloven it from you.” “What spell?” Kennit demanded. The charm’s lip curled in a disdainful smile. “The reverse of the one you felt on the way here. All succumb to it that tread this path. The magic of the Other is so strong that one cannot pass through their lands without feeling it and being drawn toward it. So they settle upon this path a spell of procrastination. One knows that their lands beckon, but one puts off visiting them until tomorrow. Always tomorrow. And hence, never. But your little threat about the kittens has unsettled them a bit. You they would lure from the path, and use as a tool to be rid of the cats.” Kennit permitted himself a small smile of satisfaction. “They did not foresee I might have a charm that would make me proof against their magic.” The charm prissed its mouth. “I but made you aware of the spell. Awareness of any spell is the strongest charm against it. Of myself, I have no magic to fling back at them, or use to deaden their own.” The face’s blue eyes shifted back and forth. “And we may yet both meet our destruction if you stand about here talking to me. The tide retreats. Soon the mate must choose between abandoning you here or letting the Marietta be devoured by the rocks. Best you hasten for Deception Cove.” “Gankis!” Kennit exclaimed in dismay. He cursed, but began to run. Useless to go back for the man. He’d have to abandon him. And he’d given him the golden locket as well! What a fool he’d been, to be so gulled by the Others’ magic. Well, he’d lost his witness and the souvenir he’d intended to carry off with him. He’d be damned if he’d lose his life or his ship as well. His long legs stretched as he pelted down the winding path. The golden sunlight that had earlier seemed so appealing was suddenly only a very hot afternoon that seemed to withhold the very air from his straining lungs. A thinning of the trees ahead alerted him that he was nearly to the cove. Instants later, he heard the drumming of Gankis’ feet on the path behind him, and was shocked when the sailor passed him without hesitation. Kennit had a brief glimpse of his lined face contorted with terror, and then he saw the sailor’s worn boots flinging up gravel from the path as he ran ahead. Kennit had thought he could not run any faster, but he suddenly put on a burst of speed that carried him out of the sheltering trees and onto the beach. He heard Gankis crying out to the ship’s boy to wait, wait. The lad had evidently decided to give up on his captain’s return, for he had pushed and dragged the gig out over the seaweed and barnacle-coated rocks to the retreating edge of the water. A cry went up from the anchored ship at the sight of Kennit and Gankis emerging onto the beach. On the afterdeck, a sailor waved at them frantically to hurry. The Marietta was in grave circumstances. The retreating tide had left her almost aground. Straining sailors were already laboring at the anchor windlass. As Kennit watched, the Marietta gave a tiny sideways list and then slid from atop a bared rock as a wave briefly lifted her clear. His heart stood still in his chest. Next to himself, he treasured his ship above all other things. His boots slipped on squidgy kelp and crushed barnacles as he scrambled down the rocky shore after the boy and gig. Gankis was ahead of him. No orders were necessary as all three seized the gunwales of the gig and ran her out into the retreating waves. They were soaked before the last one scrambled inside her. Gankis and the boy seized the oars and set them in place while Kennit took his place in the stern. The Marietta’s anchor was rising, festooned with seaweed. Oars battled with sails as the distance between the two craft grew smaller. Then the gig was alongside, the tackles lowered and hooked, and but a few moments later Kennit was astride his own deck. The mate was at the wheel, and the instant he saw his captain safely aboard, Sorcor swung the wheel and bellowed the orders that would give the ship her head. Wind filled the Marietta’s sails, and flung her out against the incoming tide into the racing current that would buffet her, but carry her away from the bared teeth of Deception Cove. A glance about the deck showed Kennit that all was in order. The ship’s boy cowered when the captain’s eyes swept over him. Kennit merely looked at him, and the boy knew his disobedience would not be forgotten nor overlooked. A pity. The boy had had a sweet smooth back; tomorrow that would no longer be so. Tomorrow would be soon enough to deal with him. Let him look forward to it for a time, and savor the stripes his cowardice had bought him. With no more than a nod to the mate, Kennit sought his own quarters. Despite the near mishap, his heart thundered with triumph. He had bested the Others at their own game. His luck had held, as it always had; the costly charm on his wrist had quickened and proved its value. And best of all, he had the oracle of the Others themselves to give the cloak of prophecy to his ambitions. He would be the first King of the Pirate Isles. CHAPTER TWO LIVESHIPS The serpent flowed through the water, effortlessly riding the wake of the ship. Its scaled body shone like a dolphin’s, but more iridescently blue. The head it lifted clear of the water was wickedly quilled with dangling barbels like those on a ratfish. Its deep blue eyes met Brashen’s and widened in expectation like a woman’s when she flirts. Then the maw of the creature opened wide, brilliantly scarlet and lined with row upon row of inward slanting teeth. It gaped open, big enough to take in a standing man. The dangling barbs stood up suddenly around the serpent’s head, a lion’s mane of poisonous darts. The scarlet mouth came darting towards him to engulf him. Darkness surrounded Brashen, and the cold carrion stench of the creature’s mouth. He flung himself away wildly with an incoherent cry. His hands met wood, and with the touch of it, relief flooded him. Nightmare. He drew a shuddering breath. He listened to the familiar sounds; the creaking of the Vivacia’s timbers, the breathing of other sleeping men and the slapping of the water against the hull. Overhead, he could hear the barefoot patter of someone springing to answer a command. All was familiar, all was safe. He took a deep breath of air thick with the scent of tarry timbers, the stink of men living long in close quarters, and beneath it all, faint as a woman’s perfume, the spicy smells of their cargo. He stretched, pushing his shoulders and feet against the cramped confines of his wooden bunk, and then settled back into his blanket. It was hours yet to his watch. If he didn’t sleep now, he’d regret it later. He closed his eyes to the dimness of the forecastle, but after a few moments, he opened them again. Brashen could sense his dream lurking
 just beneath the surface of sleep, waiting to reclaim him and drag him down. He cursed softly under his breath. He needed to get some sleep, but there’d be no rest in it if all he did was drop back down into the depths of the serpent dream. The recurrent dream was now almost more real to him than the memory. It came to trouble him at odd times, usually when he was facing some major decision. At such times it reared up from the depths of his sleep to fasten its long teeth into his soul and try to pull him under. It little mattered that he was a full-grown man now. It mattered not at all that he was as good a sailor as any he’d ever shipped with, and better than nine-tenths of them. When the dream seized on him he was dragged back to his boyhood, back to a time when all, even himself, had rightly despised him. He tried to decide what was troubling him most. His captain despised him. Yes, that was true, but it didn’t make him any less a seaman. He’d been mate on this ship under Captain Vestrit and had well proved his worth to that man. When Vestrit had taken ill, Brashen had dared to hope the Vivacia would be put into his hands to captain. Instead the old Trader had turned it over to his son-in-law Kyle Haven. Well, family was family, and Brashen could accept what had been done. Then Captain Haven had exercised his option of choosing his own first mate, and it hadn’t been Brashen Trell. Still the demotion was no fault of his own, and every sailor in the ship—no, every sailor in Bingtown itself—had known that. No shame to it; Kyle had simply wanted his own man. Brashen had thought it over and decided he’d rather serve as second mate on the Vivacia than first on any other vessel. It had been his own decision and he could fault no one else for it. Even after they had left the docks and Captain Haven had belatedly decided that he wanted a familiar man as second, and Brashen could move down yet another notch, he had gritted his teeth and obeyed his captain. But despite his years with the Vivacia and his gratitude to Ephron Vestrit, he suspected this would be the last time he shipped on her. Captain Haven had made it clear to him that he neither welcomed nor respected Brashen as a member of his crew. During this last leg of the journey, nothing he did pleased the captain. If he saw a task that needed doing and put men to work on it, he was told he’d overstepped his authority. If he did only the duties that were precisely assigned to him, he was told he was a lazy lackwit. With each passing day, Bingtown grew nearer, but Haven grew more abrasive as well. Brashen was thinking that when they tied up in their home port, if Vestrit wasn’t ready to step back on as captain again, Brashen would step off the Vivacia’s decks for the last time. It gave him a pang, but he reminded himself there were other ships, some of them fine ones, and Brashen had a name now as a good hand. It wasn’t like it had been when he’d first sailed and he’d had to take any berth he could get on any ship. Back then, surviving a voyage had been his highest priority. That first ship out, that first voyage and his nightmare were all tied together in his mind. He had been fourteen the first time he’d seen a sea serpent. It was ten long years ago now, and he had been as green as the grass stains on a tumble’s skirts. He’d been less than three weeks aboard his first ship, a wallowing Chalcedean sow called the Spray. Even in the best of water she moved like a pregnant woman pushing a barrow, and in a following sea no one could predict where the deck would be from one moment to the next. So he’d been seasick, and sore, both from the unaccustomed work and from a well-earned drubbing from the mate the night before. Sore in spirit, too, for in the dark that slimy Farsey had come to crouch by him as he slept in the forepeak, offering him words of sympathy for his bruises and then a sudden hand groping under his blanket. He’d rebuffed Farsey, but not without humiliation. The tubby sailor had a lot of muscle underneath his lard, and his hands had been all over Brashen even as the boy had punched and pummeled and writhed away from him. None of the other hands sleeping in the forepeak had so much as stirred in their blankets, let alone offered to aid him. He was not popular with the other sailors, for his body was too unscarred and his language too elevated for their tastes. “Schoolboy” they called him, not guessing how that stung. They knew they couldn’t trust him to know his business, let alone do it, and a man like that aboard a ship is a man who gets other men killed. So when he fled the forepeak and Farsey, he went to the afterdeck to sit huddled in his blanket and sniffle a bit to himself. The school and masters and endless lessons that had seemed so intolerable now beckoned to him like a siren, recalling him to soft beds and hot meals and hours that belonged to him alone. Here on the Spray, if he was seen to be idle, he caught the end of a rope. Even now, if the mate came across him, he’d either be ordered back below or put to work. He knew he should try to sleep. Instead he stared out over the oily water heaving in their wake and felt an answering unrest in his own belly. He’d have puked again, if there had been anything left to retch up. He leaned his forehead on the railing and tried to find one breath of air that did not taste of either the tarry ship or the salt water that surrounded it. It was while he was looking at the shining black water rolling so effortlessly away from the ship that it occurred to him he had one other option. It had never presented itself to him before. Now it beckoned to him, simple and logical. Slip into the water. A few minutes of discomfort, and then it would all be over. He’d never have to answer to anyone again, or feel the snap of a rope against his ribs. He’d never have to feel ashamed or frustrated or stupid again. Best of all, the decision would only take an instant, and then it would be done. There’d be no agonizing over it, not even a prayer of undoing it. One moment of decisiveness would be all he’d have to find. He stood up. He leaned over the railing, searching within himself for that one moment of strength to seize control of his own fate. But as he took that one great breath to find the will to tumble over the rail, he saw it. It slipped along, silent as time, its great sinuous body concealed in the smooth curve of water that was the wake of the ship. The wall of its body perfectly mimicked the arch of the moving water: but for the betraying moonlight showing him a momentary flank of glistening scales, Brashen would never have known the creature was there. His breath froze in his chest, catching hard and hurting him. He wanted to shout out what he’d seen, bring the second watch running back to confirm it. Back then, sightings of serpents were rare, and many a landsman still claimed they were no more than sea-tales. But he also knew what the sailors said about the big serpents. A man who sees one sees his own death. With sudden certainty, Brashen knew that if anyone else knew he’d seen one, it would be taken as an ill omen for the entire ship. There’d be only one way to purge such bad luck. He’d fall from a yard when someone else didn’t quite hold the flapping canvas down tightly enough, he’d tumble down an open hatch and break his neck, or he’d just quietly disappear some night during a long dull watch. Despite the fact that he’d been toying with the notion of suicide but a moment before, he was suddenly sure he didn’t want to die. Not by his own hand, not by anyone else’s. He wanted to live out this thrice-damned voyage, get back to shore and somehow get his life back. He’d go to his father, he’d grovel and beg as he’d never groveled and begged before. They’d take him back. Perhaps they wouldn’t take him back as heir to the Trell family fortune, but he didn’t care. Let Cerwin have it, Brashen would be more than satisfied with the portion of a younger son. He’d stop his gambling, he’d stop his drinking, he’d give up cindin. Whatever his father and grandfather demanded, he’d do. He was suddenly gripping life as tightly as his blistered hands gripped the rail, watching the scaled cylinder of flesh slide along effortlessly in the wake of the ship. Then came what had been worst. What was still worst, in his dreams. The serpent had known its defeat. Somehow, it had sensed he would not fall prey to its guile, and with a shudder as jolting as Farsey’s hand on his crotch, he knew that the impulse had not been his own, but the serpent’s suggestion. With a casual twist, the serpent slid from the cover of the ship’s wake, to expose its full sinuous body to his view. It was half the length of the Spray and gleamed with scintillant colors. It moved without effort, almost as if the ship drew it through the water. Its head was not the flat wedge shape of a land serpent but full and arched, the brow curved like a horse’s, with immense eyes set to either side. Toxic barbels dangled below its jaws. Then the creature rolled to one side in the water, baring its paler belly scales, to stare up at Brashen with one great eye. That glance was what had enervated him and sent him scrabbling away from the railing and fleeing back to the forepeak. It was still what woke him twitching from his nightmares. Immense as they had been, browless and lashless, there had still been something horribly human in the round blue eye that gazed up at him so mockingly. Althea longed for a fresh-water bath. As she toiled up the companionway to the deck, every muscle in her body ached, and her head pounded from the thick air of the aft hold. At least her task was done. She’d go to her stateroom, wash with a wet towel, change her clothes and perhaps even nap for a bit. And then she’d go to confront Kyle. She’d put it off long enough, and the longer she waited, the
 more uncomfortable she became. She’d get it over with and then damn well live with whatever it brought down on her. “Mistress Althea.” She had no more than gained the deck before Mild confronted her. “Cap’n requires you.” The ship’s boy grinned at her, half-apologetic, half-relishing being the bearer of such tidings. “Very well, Mild,” she said quietly. Very well, her thoughts echoed to herself. No wash, no clean clothes and no nap before the confrontation. Very well. She took a moment to smooth her hair back from her face and to tuck her blouse back into her trousers. Prior to her task, they had been her cleanest work clothes. Now the coarse cotton of the blouse stuck to her back and neck with her own sweat, while the trousers were smudged with oakum and tar from working in the close quarters of the hold. She knew her face was dirty, too. Well. She hoped Kyle would enjoy his advantage. She stooped down as if to re-fasten her shoe, but instead placed her hand flat on the wood of the deck. For an instant she closed her eyes and let the strength of the Vivacia flow through her palm. “Oh, ship,” she whispered as softly as if she prayed. “Help me stand up to him.” Then she stood, her resolve firm once more. As she crossed the twilit deck to the captain’s quarters, not an eye would meet hers. Every hand was suddenly very busy or simply looking off in another direction. She refused to glance back to see if they watched after her. Instead she kept her shoulders squared and her head up as she marched to her doom. She rapped sharply at the door of the captain’s quarters and waited for his gruff reply. When it came she entered, and then stood still, letting her eyes adjust to the yellow lantern light. In that instant, she felt a sudden wash of homesickness. The intense longing was not for any shoreside house, but rather for this room as it once had been. Memories dizzied her. Her father’s oilskins had hung on that hook, and the smell of his favorite rum had flavored the air. Her own hammock he had rigged in that corner when he had first allowed her to start living aboard the Vivacia, that he might better watch over her. She knew a moment of anger as her eyes took in Kyle’s clutter overlaying the familiar hominess of these quarters. A nail in his boot had left a pattern of scars across the polished floorboards. Ephron Vestrit had never left charts out, and would never have tolerated the soiled shirt flung across the chair back. He did not approve of an untidy deck anywhere on his ship, and that included his own quarters. His son-in-law Kyle apparently did not share those values. Althea pointedly stepped over a discarded pair of trousers to stand before the captain at his table. Kyle let her stand there for a few moments while he continued to peruse some notation on the chart. A notation in her father’s own precise hand, Althea noticed, and took strength from that even as her anger burned at the thought that he had access to the family’s charts. A Trader family’s charts were among their most guarded possessions. How else could one safeguard one’s swiftest routes through the Inside Passage, and one’s trading ports in lesser-known villages? Still, her father had entrusted these charts to Kyle; it was not up to her to question his decision. Kyle continued to ignore her, but she refused to rise to his bait. She stood silent and patient, but did not let his apparent disinterest fluster her. After a time he lifted his eyes to regard her. Their blueness was as unlike her father’s steady black eyes as his unruly blond hair was unlike her father’s smooth black queue. Once more she wondered with distaste what had ever possessed her older sister to desire such a man. His Chalcedean blood showed in his ways as much as in his body. She tried to keep her disdain from showing on her face, but her control was wearing thin. She’d been too long at sea with this man. This last voyage had been interminable. Kyle had muddled what should have been a simple two-month turnaround trip along Chalced’s coast into a five-month trading trek full of unnecessary stops and marginally profitable trade runs. She was convinced all of it was an effort on his part to show her father what a sly trader he could be. For herself, she had not been impressed. At Tusk he had stopped and taken on pickled sea-duck eggs, always an uncertain cargo, and barely made dock in Brigtown in time to sell them off before they went rotten. In Brigtown, he’d taken on bales of cotton, not just enough to fill the empty space in the holds but enough to make a partial deck load as well. Althea had had to bite her tongue and watch her crew take their chances as they scrambled over and around the heavy bales, and then they’d had a late gale that had soaked and most likely ruined the portion of the load on deck. She hadn’t even asked him what the profit had been, if any, when he’d stopped to auction it off in Dursay. Dursay had been their last port. The wine casks had yet again been shifted about to allow for a whim cargo. Now, in addition to the wines and brandies that had comprised their original cargo, the hold was stuffed with crates of comfer nuts. Kyle had held forth endlessly on the good price they’d bring, both for the fragrant oil from their kernels for soap and the lovely yellow dye that could be made from their husks. Althea thought that if he crowed once more about the extra profit this would wring from the voyage, she’d throttle him. But self-congratulation was not in the gaze he turned on her. It was cold as seawater, lit with tiny glints of anger.

Nelson’s Trafalgar
The English ship having come up to us, made to break the line between us and the Santa Ana.2 The Spanish ship, in fact, during our action with the English leader, had not fired a single shot, but had kept stolidly on and continued her course without shortening sail, thus giving an easy passage through to the enemy. After that, however, by the smart handling of our captain, we managed to come within our proper distance of her [the Santa Ana]; as a fact, indeed, almost with our bowsprit over their poop. By this manoeuvre we had the enemy’s ship on the port quarter in such a way that whilst we could only receive a few shots from their stern guns, they were exposed to our whole broadside, raking the enemy, end-on, along all their decks. We soon saw the English vessel’s mizzenmast go by the board, and then her rudder and steering gear were damaged, making the ship unmanageable. Her sails flapped loose in the wind, and her sheets and running rigging were cut to pieces by our hail of shot. For some time she ceased firing. We, for our part, now redoubled our efforts and we next saw her main topmast come down. At that moment the English ship hoisted two signal flags at the foremast. It made us think that she was calling for help. And we were not wrong.3

After a very little time two fresh English men-of-war came up and began to attack us; the one on the starboard quarter, the other at the stern. Under their fire, we held out for more than an hour, but they almost overpowered us with their terrible storm of round shot and a fusillade of bullets that carried death among our men. Our mizzenmast was now shot by the board, while our spars were shot from the masts and were lying in wreckage along the sides of the ship. Then, too, fire broke out in the stern walk and the poop. We tried our best, in spite of the hail of shot, to put the fire out, and with hatchets to cut adrift the mass of wreckage from the fallen masts, yards and cordage. It lay along the ship’s sides by the gun-tiers and was endangering the ship and exposing her to the most imminent risk of destruction by fire. At this moment the captain ordered me to climb outboard and see if the wreckage of the mainsail was not in danger of being set on fire from the main-deck guns. I obeyed; but as I clambered from the gangway into the chains,3 one of the enemy fired her whole starboard broadside. The din and concussion were fearful; so tremendous that I almost fell headlong into the sea. Blood gushed from my nose and ears, but it did not prevent my carrying out my duty. Then our mainmast fell. Happily it was shot through some ten or twelve feet above the deck and fell over to port. At once we cut away the shrouds [ropes bracing a mast] to starboard; but it was with great difficulty that in the end we were able to clear ourselves. Our fire was well maintained all this time, though the great superiority of the heavy guns of the English ships, and their very advantageous position, decimated our men in a fearful manner. More than half the crew had by this time been struck down, killed or wounded. Then, at length, our last remaining mast went, falling forward on to the fore part of the ship. Our flag, however, was still flying. It was the only thing left above the deck. All the same, neither our brave captain, nor a single one of our men, had a thought of lowering it.

Now, however, yet another English ship, the Temeraire of 100 guns, came down to attack us. Borne alongside of us with the current, she fell on board us. At once a broadside burst from her upper deck guns and main battery, with a hot small-arms fusillade, fired right down into us. It swept our decks clear. Even then, though, our men rallied; with cries of ‘up lads and at ’em’ repeated all over the ship, some sixty to eighty of them swarmed up on deck, armed with sabres and axes. But the huge English three-decker towered high above the Fougueux, and they fired down on us as they pleased with their musketry until, at length, they themselves boarded us. From two to three hundred of them suddenly rushed on board us, entering the ship from their chains and main-deck ports. Our captain fell dead, shot through the heart with a musket bullet. The few men who were left could make no resistance in the face of numbers. Resistance was out of the question, while still the enemy’s murderous fire from the gangways continued. We were obliged to give back and yield, though we defended the decks port by port. So the Fougueux fell into the power of the English.

A Fine Retribution
There was a welcome little breeze cross Algeciras Bay, one that felt refreshingly cool, enough so to alleviate a stultifying Midsummer day under a blazing Iberian sun. Cooling, aye, but not strong enough to waft away the odours of hot pitch being paid over deck seams that had been re-stuffed with hammered-in oakum. The ship was also being painted to cover the repaired hurts, and the large patches of pale, bare wood where smashed planks of her hull scantlings had been stove in with roundshot. Indeed, in the waist there was an impressive pile of deformed iron shot that had lodged in the ship’s timbers but had not penetrated into her vitals. Everything from grapeshot to 24-pounders and even some massive 32-pounders from French carronades; it would all go ashore in dribs and drabs to be sold off to gullible civilians and sailors off other ships as tokens of a signal victory. Or swapped for cheap drink. HMS Sapphire, a weary and battered old two-decked 50-gunner of the Fourth Rate, was almost back to normal since her arrival at Gibraltar a month before, and even Sapphire’s Captain had to offer thanks to the dockyard, and the officer in charge of it, Captain William Lobb. Perhaps it was due to the presence of a greater number of warships in Iberian waters since the British Army had opened a campaign over the border into Spain, but His Majesty’s Dockyards at Gibraltar were now bung-full of every sort of supplies that had not been available when the ship had based there two years before. There was even a sufficient store of paint; black for the hull, buff for the gunwales, royal blue for the transom, and white for fanciful carvings that decorated her stern, her quarter gallery window frames, and stern gallery posts. Bless Lobb, he even had sheets of glass, which that very instant were being cut to size and puttied into place to restore the captain’s, and wardrooms’, starboard quarter gallery sash windows, so if Sapphire’s officers “took their ease” with their breeches round their ankles, rain and spray would not come dashing in any longer, much less the risk of sitting on the “thunder box” with a large shot-hole right by one’s knee, and the surging ocean close below, as perilous a risk as sailors took when seated on the “heads” in the open air in the bows. “Chalky, get out of it,” Captain Alan Lewrie said to his cat, who was interrupting, as usual. Lewrie was writing a fulsome reccomendation of Acting-Lieutenant Hillhouse in hopes that it might help in the fellow’s future promotion. It did not help that Lewrie was not fond of Hillhouse, a bull-headed, sometime sulking lout who, in his late twenties, had yet to pass the oral examinations for an actual promotion. A good sailor, but … Mew! from Chalky, more insistently. “Oh, here. Chase that,” Lewrie griped, balling up one of the early drafts and heaving it cross the great-cabins, but Chalky, now of an age as cats go, had lost his fondness for toys, and stayed atop the desk. Mrr! punctuated by a lash of his tail. “Go find something t’do,” Lewrie muttered, almost sweeping the cat off the desk-top. He returned to his letter, but had lost his train of thought, and grunted in frustration. “’Allo, puss,” a sailor from the working-party aft said. “Chalky, get out o’ that, too!” Lewrie snapped, getting to his feet to go retrieve the cat from interfering with the work on his starboard quarter-gallery. He scooped up the cat, who had been poking and pawing at the fresh glass panes before they set, pawing round the empty gaps. There was a newly hung door to the quarter-gallery, and Lewrie shut it. “God, but you’re a trial,” Lewrie said as he carried the cat in his arms to the starboard side settee and dumped him on the padded seat. “I’ll be on deck, Pettus. Keep him out o’ trouble, if that’s possible.” “I’ll try, sir,” his cabin steward replied, grinning. Hatless and coatless, Lewrie went forward to the door to the quarterdeck and stepped out into the full miasma of repair; paint and hot tar and pitch, with only the faintest sweet tang of fresh-sawn lumber, and the louder din of caulking tools, hammers, and the thuds of hot loggerheads as they paid seams. And there, right at the forward edge of the quarterdeck, stood the reason that HMS Sapphire would remain anchored at Gibraltar for some time into the future, and the one item that Captain Lobb could not supply him; the weakened lower mainmast trunk. French shot had gnawed and chipped it like so many industrious beavers when Sapphire had lain herself at the head of the squadron’s line of battle to take on the most formidable of the four enemy frigates they had fought a month before. It was a bloody wonder that it hadn’t toppled like a storm-lashed tree right then, which would have spelled disaster. Now, though, the lower mast had been re-enforced with spare anchor stocks to vertically span the damage, then woolded with taut-wrapped kedge anchor cable like a splint on a man’s broken limb. The topmasts above the fighting top still stood, minus royal or t’gallant yards, but Lewrie could not trust it with any sort of canvas spread above the tops’l. Whole lower masts, fore, main, or mizen, were not items which lay round loose by the dozens. No, they had to be crafted, scaled to the ship in which they would be installed. Lewrie had discovered that in January of this year when Sapphire had been struck by lightning on-passage from Corunna to Portsmouth, and it had taken the Commissioner of Portsmouth Dockyards weeks to come up with a replacement. Just in time, too, for Admiralty could have ordered Sapphire de-commissioned and turned her over to the Transport Board to serve out her days as a troop or supply ship. Even after finding a replacement lower mast, Lewrie had had to go up to London to plead, cajole, and make some inventive (and suspiciously optimistic) promises to keep his skilled crew together, and his active commission as her Captain. Now, here it was again; the same dread of losing her. And how could he explain it away, this time? You’re a cack-handed, clumsy bastard, ain’t ya, Lewrie, he imagined Admiralty scolding; What, you’ve broken another? If you can’t play nice with your toys, we’ll have to take them away ’til you learn better! The thought made him smile, if only for an instant. He went up the larboard ladderway to the poop deck, his usual perch when at sea, but a working-party was just gathering their loggerheads and tar pots after sealing the seams in his cabins’ overhead, so a stroll aft to the taffrail lanthorns and flag lockers was out; his shoes would be ruined before the tar cooled. Even his lubberly collapsible wood-and-canvas deck chair, in which he could sprawl high above the bustle of a ship under way, was right out. It was now hung over the iron stanchions which held tight-rolled sailors’ hammocks and bedding, like a jack-knife. With a shrug and a sigh, Lewrie settled for a leisurely stroll forward along the larboard sail-tending gangway, apart from the busy starboard side, acknowledging the sailors or Marines that he met with a nod or a cheery “Good morning” which he most certainly did not feel, dredging up names; after two years, he recognised them as well as he would have all his cousins at a family reunion. He stopped at the larboard anchor cat-heads and the roundhouse above the forecastle, gave that offending mainmast one more damning glare, then looked out-board at the shore, the high battlements of Gibraltar’s fortifications, and the tiers of the town which arose on the steep slopes of The Rock beyond them. Except on official matters, Lewrie had not taken even a brief run ashore yet, and now that Sapphire was finally put to rights, a few hours off the ship would be welcome. There were chop-houses where he could partake in a fresh meal, particularly a seafood house by name of Pescador’s, run by a retired Army Sergeant-Major and his Spanish wife and children, that featured a cool cellar full of imported ales and beers from England. There were more taverns and public houses at Gibraltar than there were soldiers in the garrison, it seemed; one in particular, the Ten Tuns, had an awninged outdoor seating area and piles of newspapers where he could idle some hours away with a glass or two of white wine and some Spanish-style tapas for appetisers. Good memories of both places, when his former ship’s clerk, Thomas Mountjoy, and he could scheme raids along the Southern Spanish coast a few years back, and Mountjoy, actually an agent with Foreign Office’s Secret Branch, could slyly impart the latest doings back in London, or the progress of his plans to subvert the Spanish away from being a French ally to one of theirs. In his own infuriating “wait for it!” way, Mountjoy had been a fount of inside information, here at Gibraltar, and later in Lisbon, and they had developed a bantering but enjoyable partnership as long as the “skulking set” found him useful. Now, though, Mountjoy’s replacement at Gibraltar was a dour sort of sod who hadn’t spared Lewrie two minutes of his time, and had looked askance that some Navy officer had even thought to call upon him at the cover offices of the so-called Falmouth Import & Export Company, Ltd., much less at the top-floor lodgings that Mountjoy had occupied, up near the headquarters of the Army garrison. Lewrie looked up that way briefly, but the awninged outdoor gallery where Mountjoy had set his astronomical telescope to keep an eye on the Spanish Lines was now a blank; even the potted greenery was gone. Pescador’s, perhaps? That memory forced Lewrie to shift his gaze southward to the lower town, and an upper-storey balcony with a set of glazed double doors, where he had lodged his mistress, Maddalena Covilh?. There was no joy from that quarter, either, no joyous waving of glad welcome whenever his ship stood in, or departed. Pescador’s was where he had first met her. Would going
 there be too painful? Did I do right by her? he asked himself, again. He’d moved her from Gibraltar to Lisbon when he’d returned to Spanish waters as a Commodore with a small squadron meant to scour the dangerous North coast of Spain to interdict French supply convoys, and Maddalena, being Portuguese, had revelled in becoming a real Lisboêta at long last, in the city she’d always longed to see. But, when General Sir Arthur Wellesley had driven the French from Oporto, Maddalena’s birthplace, and Lewrie had thought to shift his squadron there to be days closer to their hunting grounds, she’d balked. She had so many reasons she never wanted to return there; her impoverished, illiterate family the foremost, which she’d fled at the first opportunity, to their great outrage. It wasn’t even a spat, much less an argument, but his suggestion had been the first omen that what relationship they had was exceedingly temporary, after all. War, the Navy, new orders … chance? Lewrie painfully recalled that last night before he had sailed away the final time, and how sad and sombre she had looked as she had whispered, “I will always love you, Alan, meu amor,” before sweeping up the stairs to her lodgings, leaving him standing in a strong rain. He had left her an hundred pounds at a Lisbon bank, and left her lodgings paid in full for an entire year, and she had employment with Mountjoy and Secret Branch as a multi-lingual translator; Portuguese, Spanish, English, even French, highly useful in the “war by newsprint” and false information smuggled over the border to infuriate Spanish partisans, and lower the morale of the French who came across the bogus newspapers full of depressing news from home. Spilled milk, he groaned to himself; silly, inane … call it what you will. If only I’d kept my fool mouth shut! For there had been no shift to Oporto; the city’s dockyards couldn’t support his ships, and there was no guarantee that the French could not come back and re-take the city, with only a small garrison of the Portuguese army to protect it. And now here he was, stuck at Gibraltar with no squadron, no broad pendant, a ship that might be ordered home by the next mail from London, and … no mistress. Lewrie heaved a philosophical sigh as he made his way further forward, right to the beakheads to give the newly re-painted figurehead, a crouching crowned lion with a large gem clutched to its chest, a reassuring pat for good luck. That grinning beast had seen them through to a signal victory, even though at great cost. Lewrie could allow himself a moment of smug satisfaction, even if it was a brief one. It wasn’t every day lately that anyone had a Chinaman’s chance to bring four French warships to battle and defeat them in such a crushing victory. They’d been in port long enough for the London papers and The Naval Chronicle to catch up with them, along with the copies that his father, Sir Hugo Willoughby, had sent along. Well, The Naval Chronicle re-printed his and his subordinate officers’ dry, sufficiently humble action reports, all of which were carefully written to avoid prideful boasting. No, it was the papers, The Times and The Gazette, that had done the boasting for them, comparing the battle to a miniature Trafalgar, which Lewrie had thought a bit much. The newspaper writers had been positively ghoulish in their descriptions of how many Frenchmen had been slain, mutilated by shot, and surgeons’ treatments, revelling in the “butcher’s bill” and how a Hearty British Tar was the equal of any five or six cowardly Frogs. Speeches in Commons and Lord’s were re-printed that declared that, after the shameful showing of the Royal Navy under the hapless command of Admiral James Gambier at Aix Roads—“Dismal Jemmy” to the Navy—where a fine victory had been squandered by Gambier’s dithering, and French ships that should have been taken or burned to the waterline had been allowed to escape, despite the pluck and daring of Captain Lord Thomas Cochrane’s assault with fireships and bombs, it was Captain Sir Alan Lewrie, Bt., and his ships that had revived the “tradition of victory” for the Navy, and had won fresh laurels for it! There were calls made for commemorative sets of silver plate for all Captains and Commanders present, presentation swords, instant promotions, financial rewards perhaps, coins (not actual medals) for every participant to be minted. Some in the Commons lauded Lewrie as a man just as courageous and daring as Cochrane. Lewrie had winced at that, for everyone in the Navy knew that Thomas Cochrane was a too-proud, arrogant, and reckless “neck-or-nothing” madman who’d run roughshod over social inferiors, orders, or superior officers if he thought he knew better! Besides, what had the acclaim gotten Cochrane in the end? Gambier’s court-martial had white-washed the fool, and it was Cochrane who’d resigned and entered the House of Lords to wrangle for justice for himself. More personally, Lewrie had gotten yet another packet of newspaper articles, and a welcome letter from his former First Officer, Lieutenant Geoffrey Westcott, who had taken the largest of the prizes home … kicking and screaming to avoid the duty, but he’d gone. Now, he was glad that he had, for he was to be promoted to Commander and put in command of a brig-sloop, most-likely, but he would stride his own quarterdeck, at long last. Westcott had gotten assurances that all four prizes would be “bought in” to Royal Navy service, and that meant that soon there would be lashings, umpteen thousands of pounds due to every ship which had participated, a windfall that Westcott was eager to spend on himself, beginning with wine, women, song, and … women! Geoffrey Westcott. Lewrie missed him, too, glad though he was to see a good man advance. Westcott had become the closest friend that Lewrie had allowed himself to have aboard the same ship, in the same crew, slowly abandoning the demanded separation of a Captain from the rest of his ship’s people. Lewrie and Westcott had served together nigh six years, though, first in the Reliant frigate in 1803, then in Sapphire since 1807, and Lewrie had come to rely on Westcott’s good sense in all things, sure that Geoffrey would present him with a ship and crew in good order, and in good spirits, and Lewrie had enjoyed the way they had learned to rub together, and … “Just damn my eyes, what do you think you’re doing, Twomey?” Acting-Lieutenant Hillhouse screeched. “There’s paint all over the bloody deck! Master at Arms, here! Pass word for the Master at Arms!” Damn, but I miss Westcott! Lewrie thought; Christ, here we go again! CHAPTER TWO Lewrie crossed over the forecastle to the starboard side, then down the ladderway to the waist, where the tirade was continuing, and it had drawn Lieutenant Harcourt, now Sapphire’s First Officer, to boot. “A paint spill, sir?” Lewrie asked, looking at the weedy and wiry offending sailor, Twomey, who stood all but trembling under the Second Officer’s wrath. “Should be on charges, sir,” Hillhouse growled, “for clumsiness, and making a mess. I’ve sent for the Master at Arms.” “I heard,” Lewrie sternly said. “What happened, Twomey?” “Can o’ buff paint f’r th’ gunn’ls, sir,” Twomey stuttered, red in the face, “come up empty on a line wif th’ ol’ brush innit, an’ it snagged on th’ cap-rails an’ spilt a little. Sorry, sir.” There were a couple of splotches of buff paint on the white-sanded deck planks, and another where a stiff, worn-out brush had alit. “No need for Mister Baggett that I see, Mister Hillhouse,” Lewrie told him. “Send for a Bosun’s Mate, Nobbs or Plunkett, rather, and some paint thinner to take that up. That, or some of our issue wine, either’d do, hey? See you scrub it all up, Twomey.” “Aye, I will, sir, an’ thankee, sir!” Twomey said, head bobbing and grinning in relief that he’d escaped an appearance at a Captain’s Mast and a threat of punishment. And, the comparison of paint thinner to the quality of “Miss Taylor” or “Blackstrap”, the cheapest wines that the Navy supplied, had amused the fellow, too. “Carry on, all,” Lewrie said, turning away. “Ehm, if I may, though, sir?” Lieutenant Harcourt, the First Officer who had come to the commotion, bade. “Aye, Mister Harcourt?” Lewrie replied, knowing what was coming. He crooked a finger to lead Harcourt forward to the forecastle belfry and manger where they might not be overheard by the sailors. Noises from the beasts in the manger helped mask their words, and Lewrie had a hope that the farmyard smells from piglets, chickens, nanny goat, and kids might force Harcourt’s gripe to be a brief one. “Discipline, sir,” Harcourt began once they were near the manger, and Lewrie tried not to roll his eyes as Lieutenant Harcourt mounted his hobby horse once again. “The hands are going slack and truculent. If we were at sea…” “Which we are not, sir,” Lewrie was quick to point out. “And most-like we won’t be, ’til next Epiphany, at this rate.” “This sitting idle, sir, it isn’t doing the people any good,” Lieutenant Harcourt said. “We may have to take steps…” “Well, not idle, really,” Lewrie countered, striving for a calm tone, instead of grabbing Harcourt by his coat lapels and giving him a good shake. “We’ve been doing a lot of our own repairs, and that has kept ’em busy.” “For now, sir,” Harcourt insisted, “but, now the major work is done, it will be hard to come up with any sort of ‘make-work’ to keep their minds on their proper duties. Some shore liberty may help after that, but only for so long, and I fear that we may have to resort to the ‘cat’ or serious stoppages, soon.” “Shore liberty?” Lewrie scoffed. “They’d had one decent run ashore since we got here, and none of our previous prize-money’s come in yet. They’re as skint as church-mice, with not two pence to rub together, and can’t afford a good liberty. You know my policy about corporal punishment,
 sir. I’ll not flog our people without a just cause.” But you and Hillhouse would! he thought, a tad angrily. “Bread and water, no rum, no tobacco … those only go so far, sir,” Harcourt grumped, stiffening his posture. “I know,” Lewrie replied, growing a bit exasperated. “Come up with activities, contests, watch-against-watch t’keep ’em occupied. We can have ’em row or sail races with the cutters, competing choirs, choose the best dancers. Once the last piddlin’ chores are done, I’ll declare a ‘Make and Mend’ day, and ‘Splice the Mainbrace’. After that, we’ll re-establish cutlass, pike, and musketry drill, dry practice on the great guns, and those routines should take care of some of their idleness. It’s our job t’keep the people in good spirits, especially the job of my First Officer. Think what Westcott would’ve done and emulate his example. “But, only bring men up on charges that are deservin’ of the lash, Mister Harcourt,” Lewrie sternly cautioned. “They ain’t a pack o’ raw lubbers, not the sort t’beat and bully into submission.” Harcourt scowled and pursed his lips as if he would say something, ducking his head as if being compared to Lieutenant Westcott was unfair. Or maybe you don’t compare, and know it, Lewrie thought. “You never can tell, Mister Harcourt,” Lewrie genially added, smiling in hope that Harcourt might still measure up, “the yards may turn up a new mast for us, and we’ll be back at sea, where none o’ this matters!” “A thing devoutly to be wished, sir, aye,” Harcourt said, seeming to deflate like a bladder as he realised that his arguments would not avail. “And don’t let the Mids get so bored that they start usin’ the crew as objects of cruel amusement, either, sir,” Lewrie warned. “Do carry on, Mister Harcourt, and … be inventive, hey?” “Aye, sir.” Lewrie had to admit that he had never really liked either Lieutenant Harcourt, or Hillhouse, who had been a senior Midshipman when he had read himself into command of Sapphire, replacing her former Captain. That sour, dyspeptic Tartar had been a harsh disciplinarian, opposed by a First Officer more like a “Popularity Dick”, and the ship had been divided into two factions, with Second Officer Harcourt and Midshipman Hillhouse of the Captain’s persuasion. Unfortunately, her Captain and First Officer had despised each other so hotly that they had resorted to a duel with pistols, wounding each other both in body and career. Westcott! Lewrie and Westcott had found a way to ameliorate the situation, knitting the crew and wardroom into a well-drilled and efficient, happy whole. Lots of action, prize-money, and pride in new-won prowess and the right to swagger when ashore had gone a long way towards accomplishing that. Now, though, so long as Sapphire sat idle, Lewrie doubted that even the sudden arrival of a whole year’s pay and prize-money on top of that would lift his sailors’ gloom. And Harcourt and Hillhouse were not helping, too set in their ways and dispositions, too eager to resort to corporal punishment before anything else had been tried! Lewrie thought to return to the larboard sail-tending gangway and make his way aft to the quarterdeck once more, but now Bosun Terrell was barking orders as a work-boat from the dockyards was coming alongside to larboard with fresh casks of water to fill Sapphire’s novel iron tanks. And the sight of the Purser, Mr. Cadrick, and his Jack-in-the-Breadroom, Irby, on the gangway with ledger books told Lewrie that there most-like were other boats behind the water hoy, laden with flour sacks, dried fruits for duffs, shore-baked bread, vegetables, and sides of slaughtered beef fetched from the Morrocan port of Tétuan to replace rock-hard salt-meats. Lewrie heaved a sigh and turned to go aft down the main deck. “’Ware, Cap’m!” a ship’s boy cried. “Oh…!” Lewrie was being butted on the shins! He looked down to discover a kid goat, lowering and shaking its wee head for another go at being a “billy” in training. As the kid launched itself, Lewrie bent and scooped it up, bleating and all four hooves frantically scrambling in sudden indignity, held it to his chest despite the rank odour, and handed it to the “duck fucker” in charge of the manger. “Sorry, sir, ’e jus’ got out, somehow!” the boy spluttered as he took the kid and held it, cradling it like a mis-behaving puppy. “No matter,” Lewrie said. “Leash him if ye have to. Mind, now,” Lewrie said in mock severity, “he keeps that up, and I might demand a roast kid for my supper. Love roast goat, I surely do!” The boy gulped and shoved the kid back into the pen with its nanny. Lewrie went on aft, laughing, and glad to find some amusement in a frustrating day, and went up the ladderway to the quarterdeck, where he was greeted by the ship’s mascot, a brown-and-white, black-muzzled dog named Bisquit. “Well, hallo, Bisquit, and where’ve you been hidin’?” he asked as he bent and ruffled his fur. Ship’s dog, mine arse! he thought. Bisquit had been smuggled aboard by the Reliant frigate’s Midshipmen when anchored at Nassau, New Providence in the Bahamas, an island mutt which had rapidly become the entire crew’s pet, but, when Reliant had paid off and no one else could take him along to their next ship, it was Lewrie who’d volunteered to take him along to his father’s farm at Anglesgreen in Surrey for that long winter to heal up from a wound he’d suffered during a battle with a Spanish frigate off Buenos Aires. Now, though the dog was still a friend to one and all, especially when there were goodies offered in the messes belowdecks, it was in Lewrie’s great-cabins where Bisquit got his main feeding, and a patch of carpet to curl up on. Lewrie’s cat, Chalky, was still not too sure of the arrangement, but the two had somewhat adapted to each other’s presence. “Want a sausage, do ye, Bisquit? Thought you would!” Lewrie teased as he headed for his cabins, and the dog frisked alongside him, tail whisking and looking up adoringly. Of course he’d like a sausage; he even knew the word! And when Lewrie dug into his stash of wee sausages and jerked meat strips, an entire hundredweight that he kept well-stocked, Chalky came begging for one, too, though he took his atop the dining table where Bisquit would not grab it. After some petting for both of them, they settled down and he went aft to the doors to his stern gallery, where that little breeze might mitigate the lingering stinks, but there was no shade to be had, and Lewrie merely stood by the doors, looking outwards, again. Lewrie had allowed himself one of those wee sausages, too, and idly chewed the last of it, pondering a run ashore, after all, though he felt a minor pang of guilt that he could afford to do so when his sailors could not, not ’til some prize-money trickled in. He thought again of the seafood restaurant, and began to yearn for lobster and drawn butter, scallops, shrimp, and mussels in white wine sauce, with piping-hot fresh bread rolls. He tempted himself with an image of a cool ale to begin with, then a whole bottle of some white wine like the vinho verde he’d discovered at Lisbon. A green salad with oil and vinegar … yum! He thought that there might even be some sparkling white wines from Spain available, now that the trade cross the fortified Lines was so open, and the great expanse of dead ground ’twixt British and Spanish ramparts had been turned into grazing land for Spanish livestock! Some company during his repast? Pescador’s was a favourite of the subaltern officers, the young sparks of the Gibraltar garrison, where they brought the fetching morts “under their protection”, most of whom were “no nicer than they had a right to be”. An hour or so of harmless flirtation with the ones un-accompanied?

“Ah, it looks bad, right enough, sir,” Mr. Posey, the Surveyor of the Portsmouth Dockyards, gloomily said as he gave the main topmast a thump with his fist. He would have said more, but had to go for his calico handkerchief once more to contain a massive sneeze, then a huge, phlegmy, gargling cough. Thought he’d sneeze himself right off the shrouds on the way up here, Captain Sir Alan Lewrie, Baronet, thought. He would have taken a step away from the man to avoid catching whatever he had, but for the fact that they were standing in the mainmast fighting top, having come up through the lubber’s hole, most un-seamanly. It had been ages since Lewrie had ascended any higher than the cat harpings of the mainmast, and if either one of them had taken the proper route, hanging upside down from the futtock shrouds and clawing up and over the rim of the top, they would now both be smashed to jelly on the deck, far below. Now, there’s a cure for his sniffles, Lewrie told himself. “Your pardons, sir,” Mr. Posey continued. “Lightning, was it?” “Aye, one Hell of a crack, and I haven’t trusted it with even a handkerchief, since,” Lewrie told him, taking a half-step back as Posey whipped his handkerchief from the turnback of his coat’s cuff and captured yet another massive sneeze. *   *   * The weather on their way back from the evacuation of the army at Corunna had been brisk, and the seas rough, requiring reefed top-sails, and the striking below of the royal and t’gallant masts. That had brought the lightning conductor head down to the lower mast cap. Rain was pouring down, cold and hard as ice pellets, and lightning could be seen all round them, miles away, fork-flashing at the seas. Suddenly, there had come a flash brighter than day, sizzling the air, raising mens’ hair on end, a searing explosion of light and heat, so bright that everyone’s eyes were nigh-blinded for long seconds. The clap of thunder that accompanied the flash was so sudden, and so loud that, for a second or two, Lewrie imagined that the ship had blown up! Lost in the titanic roar had been the splintering of the topmast, and the splitting of the lower main mast just above the fighting top. The cap had been set afire, to boot, quickly extinguished by the rain, leaving a plume of thin grey smoke spurting to leeward. Three men in the top had been killed outright, and another two had been rendered senseless, deaf, and half-blind for days after. Oh yes, it had been lightning! *   *   * “We fished it, as you can see,” Lewrie said, pointing out the spare anchor stocks that had been nailed to the main mast, woolded with wraps of hawsers, and shimmed. “The iron bands all the way down to the upper deck partners had t’be re-enforced, too. So … I expect she’ll need an entire new lower mast?” “Oh, indeed, sir, indeed,” Mr. Posey heartily agreed, done with his survey, and returning to the lubber’s hole in the top for a climb back down to the weather deck. “Ah-achoo! Ah, pardons. If you would be so good as to strip her down to a gantline, and un-ship all shrouds and backstays, I can have the sheer hulk alongside by Monday. Though … fashioning a lower mast to the proper dimensions may take awhile, sir … ah-achoo! At least we can have the bad’un out ’til then. I will need the length of the main course and tops’l yards for my calculations, if you please, sir.” God, I’m stuck in port ’til next Epiphany, Lewrie thought, despairing. There weren’t many Fourth Rate 50-gunners left in the Navy inventory; most had been turned into troop transports minus guns, or were used as harbour stores hulks. Warships of roughly the same class and design had their specifications drawn up to strict mathematical calculations of mast thickness, lower taper, length, upper diameter to fit through the partners of the lower and upper gun decks, and how they must be stepped to the keelson deep below, with the length of their yards laid out to yet another set of calculations. It might take weeks for the dockyards to fashion one, if none was laying about ready for use, which was extremely “iffy”! Posey seemed free enough of sneezes to assay the climb down the narrowing main stays and ratlines, and swing out and around to the outer face of the larboard main shrouds. Lewrie followed him, gingerly. But, damned if the bastard didn’t pause to sneeze, again, with both hands busy, and expel a cloud of snot and droplets without his handkerchief. The air was so cold in harbour that Posey’s breath—along with snot—resembled a sudden burst from a 6-pounder gun! Lewrie waited ’til that cloud dissipated, then clambered down, slowly and carefully, to the larboard bulwarks and dropped to the safety of the sail-tending gangway. He hoped that he wasn’t infected! Lewrie saw Mr. Posey to the starboard entry-port, made some polite departure small talk, then doffed his hat as the side-party rendered debarking honours. “A whole new lower mast, is it, sir?” Lt. Geoffrey Westcott, HMS Sapphire’s First Officer, glumly asked once Mr. Posey was in his boat, and its crew stroking for the distant shore. “Aye, if they can find one,” Lewrie told him, “or make a new one.” “Oh, good!” Westcott replied with a glint in his eyes, and a quick, fierce grin. “Bags of shore liberty, then. Mirth, glee … wine and women.” “Most especially women,” Lewrie said with a roll of his eyes. Geoffrey Westcott and Lewrie had been paired for nigh six years, come May, in the same ships, first the Reliant frigate, and now Sapphire, and Lewrie had stood in awe of how aggressively his First Lieutenant pursued “quim”. Lewrie, no slacker when it came to discovering a willing lady, felt like a monk in comparison! “Well, at least we can still use the main course yard for hoisting stores aboard,” Westcott commented, looking aloft, “even if we had to jury-rig.” “Aye, continue loading fresh stores, but when the sheer hulk comes alongside on Monday, everything will have t’be stripped away,” Lewrie told him. “And, we’ll have to stretch some canvas over the gaps when it’s extracted, from the weather deck right down to the orlop, else all the rain and snow get in.” “I’ll see to it, sir,” Westcott promised, touched fingers to the brim of his cocked hat, and walked away. Probably t’stay warm, Lewrie told himself as he lingered by the starboard bulwarks to gaze at the shore, and the town. Portdown Hill was almost obscured by the low, grey, and swift-scudding clouds, and the spires of the churches were almost brushed with them. Under that unbroken gloom, the coal smoke from thousands of chimneys spewed an even darker pall. It had snowed before HMS Sapphire, the other escorting warships, and the clutch of troopships had entered port and had come to anchor, then warmed and melted what snow had fallen, turning Portsmouth and its environs into a dingy grey and black sketch with the red brick of manufacturies, warehouses, and government buildings the only discernible colour. What accumulations of snow that remained had gone to dark mud and coal-soot grey. It was trying to snow again, in a lacklustre fashion, in swirls and gusts that played out before any new accumulation could sugarcoat the winter’s ugliness. As Lewrie paced along the quarterdeck’s rails, his boots found icy patches of snow just half-melted then re-frozen to sound crunchy, then another patch of fresher snow just deep enough to muffle his steps. When he turned to look forward towards the bows, he could see some of the ship’s boys trying to make the best of what had fallen on the decks to make snowballs. They had formed two sides in roughly equal numbers, but there wasn’t much to work with, and after a few volleys back and forth, the game was played out for lack of “ammunition”. “Mister Fywell,” he said to one of the Midshipmen standing Harbour Watch, “break out the brooms at the end of the Second Dog, and have the ship swept down. No sense in someone breakin’ their necks on an icy patch, not after survivin’ the voyage here.” “Aye aye, sir, I will see to it,” Fywell replied, coming out of his shivery in-attention. He was swaddled in a heavy grogram watch-coat, a colourful civilian wool muffler, and mittens, but still had to stamp his buckled shoes to keep life in his feet, and his cotton duck slop-trousers were no help in repelling the chill wind that stirred the harbour waters to confused chops. “Carry on, then,” Lewrie said, knowing that the older Mids had put the “younkers” in their place on such a day, and made a note to himself to check on the watchstanders of the First and Second Dog Watches to see if Hillhouse, Leverett, and Britton, the eldest, were taking their proper turns. As was his wont when seeking a wider view, he went on up to the poop deck and looked over the anchorage for the Undaunted frigate, in which his youngest son, Hugh, served, then for the two brig-sloops, Blaze and Peregrine, which had been with him since they had left Gibraltar weeks before. All appeared to be in good order. They should be, after all; they hadn’t been struck by lightning! Capt. Chalmers had fetched Undaunted close aboard soon after the strike to offer aid, but could not help from teasing, asking Lewrie “What sins has the Good Lord punished you for, sir?” and she was close enough for Lewrie to see Hugh at her rails, laughing his young arse off! Once in port, Lewrie had summoned his crew to tell them that they’d done a grand thing in fetching off every last survivor of the late General Sir John Moore’s army, all the wounded and sick, from the clutches of the pursuing French armies, along with all the army’s supplies, leaving the starving enemies with not a morsel of loot, and only the brief warmth of the great pyres of burning supplies that they could not load aboard the hundred-odd rescue ships before they had sailed away. And, despite the brutal weather on-passage from Corunna, not a single troopship had been lost, which
 he’d told his men that they should be proud of doing. Privately, though, Lewrie had had a hard time believing that, himself. He had been a Midshipman at Yorktown during the American Revolution, escaping by the skin of his teeth the night before when the hasty evacuation of Cornwallis’s army had been scotched by a storm that had howled down from inland, turning the York River into a maelstrom that had flushed his shoddily and hastily built greenwood barge, along with a few others, as far as Guinea Neck, leaving them to make a skulking further escape past the French fleet to the sea beyond the Chesapeake Bay capes, and rescue by a passing British warship. He’d been a Lieutenant at the evacuation of Toulon, seconded off the Cockerel frigate to command a captured French Third Rate, cut down to a razee and turned into a large mortar ship, which, by the by, had been hit in the wrong place whilst shelling Fort LeGarde to ruin, and blown up underneath him. He’d had temporary command of a French frigate to get as many of the captured enemy fleet away before the French took the city, at last, and butchered or guillotined the French Royalists that the ships of the First Coalition could not find room for. And now he had been at Corunna, and had plucked yet another British army to safety before its destruction. Christ, but it gets old, don’t it, he sadly thought; And I’m cold, he noticed as the winds picked up and a few icy pellets of snow began to flurry about him. Despite wearing itchy woolen underdrawers beneath his dark blue wool trousers, woolen stockings inside his Hessian boots, and his coat buttoned double over his chest, he still shivered, and wished that he had not sold off his furs that he had not had a real use for since he had sailed into the Baltic in winter, just before the Battle of Copenhagen, to scout the ice and the naval ports of Sweden and Russia which were allies of the Danes. It was time to stop dawdling in depressing thoughts, and go below to his great-cabins, where, with any luck, it might be a touch warmer, out of the wind. “And where’s old Captain Speaks’ Franklin stoves when I really need one?” he muttered to himself as he went down the starboard ladderway to the quarterdeck. He heard a tentative woof! from the improvised dog house under the ladderway. Lewrie ducked down to peer in, and sure enough, the ship’s dog, Bisquit, was in there, getting to his feet and shaking off one of the cast-off old blankets which he’d half-pulled over himself. “Hallo, Bisquit,” Lewrie said, “what the Devil are ye doin’ in there? You should be below on the gun decks, where it’s warmer.” Bisquit perked up his stand-and-fall ears and whisked his bushy tail, taking that for an invitation, and wriggled out to stand on his hind legs with his front paws on Lewrie’s coat, eager for some “wubbies”, which Lewrie was happy to supply, making the dog break out one of his glad grins. “I’m goin’ in, out o’ the wind. Care t’join me, just this once?” Lewrie said, cupping Bisquit’s head and rubbing his ears. “Can’t promise it’ll be that much warmer, but there’s a carpet for you t’curl up on.” He turned to the door to his great-cabins, just under the poop deck’s overhang, and Bisquit frisked at his heels. Hardly had Lewrie nodded to the Marine private who guarded his sanctuary and laid hold of the knob than Bisquit dashed through the narrow gap, galloping into the cabins. The Marine sentry lowered his musket from Present Arms and turned up the wide collar of his little-used greatcoat after saluting the Captain, muttering under his breath “Wisht I could roll up on a warm carpet, too!” CHAPTER TWO “Have we anything hot, Pettus?” Lewrie asked his cabin-steward as he blew on his hands to warm them. His cabins were a bit warmer, only due to being out of that wind, and closed up snugly, but five warm bodies—Lewrie, Pettus and young Jessop, Bisquit and the cat, Chalky—did little to heat it, not like the upper and lower gun decks where the body heat of hundreds of off-watch sailors and Marines was trapped beneath closed hatches and behind sealed gun ports. They had small lanthorns or glim candles by the dozens, too. “Aye, sir!” Pettus piped up. “There’s a pot of tea just brewed on the sideboard, with a warming candle under it. Would you care for a dollop of rum or brandy with it, sir?” “That I would,” Lewrie eagerly agreed, “a mug that I can wrap my fingers round, not a dainty cup. Hallo, Chalky, and how are you?” he asked his cat, which had been napping on the starboard side settee. One of his servants had tucked a tea towel over the cat, a white one, making it hard to distinguish where the tea towel ended and the whiteish furred Chalky began. He was so comfortable that even the dog’s exuberant entry and quick scout of the great-cabins hadn’t stirred him. Lewrie gave Chalky some head strokes, and ran a finger along his jowls that brought him to all fours, and an arching of his back. Which bliss lasted but a moment, for Bisquit decided to come to the settee to see what the animated towel was all about, and Chalky was off in a dash for the bed space and shelter atop the hanging bed-cot where the dog might not be able to leap. “Oh, well,” Lewrie sighed, transferring his attention to the dog for a moment before crossing the day cabin to his desk to seat himself, open a drawer, and pull out writing paper. “Damme, I’ve the last quire o’ good paper left, maybe less.” “Mister Faulkes, he said he wuz almost out, too, sir,” Jessop spoke up from the wine cabinet, where he was fetching out the rum, “an’ thought he might haveta borry from you, afore we got new from a chandler.” “Well, that’s one of many shortages soon t’be solved,” Lewrie said, jerking his head shoreward. “Be aboard by morning.” Pettus brought him a large ceramic mug of steaming-hot tea, redolent of a large dollop of rum, and Lewrie held it under his nose for a good long time, letting out an “aahh”, holding it with both hands. A second satisfied “aahh” followed his first, deep sip. Pettus had laced the tea with lots of sugar, and some goat’s milk from the nanny in the forecastle manger, and it was heavenly going down, warming him even down to his toes. Lewrie transferred some of that warmth with one hand on the dog’s furry head, bestowing some more “wubbies” as Bisquit sat at his side. “Gotten spoiled, ye have,” Lewrie gently teased, “all that one winter at my father’s house in the country, after I got shot. All of the fireplaces, and the kitchens, when Mistress Furlough wasn’t lookin’, hey?” Oh, Bisquit had had a fine time of it, that winter, even to the point of leaping to the foot of Pettus’s, Jessop’s, Liam Desmond’s, or Patrick Furfy’s beds for the night … or curling up in front of the fireplace in Lewrie’s bedchamber some nights, truth to tell. Lewrie turned his attention to his letter writing. As soon as Sapphire had dropped anchor at Portsmouth, pre-written reports to the Admiralty of his doings, and his ship’s damage, had gone off in the post, along with personal correspondence. Now, he would have to write a fresh report concerning his damaged lower main mast, and what the yards would do to pull it like a rotten tooth and replace it with … what? This’ll take some careful doin’, he thought, steeling himself. If he was brutally honest about the severity of the damage to the mast, and the slim odds of there being a spare in the mast ponds to replace it, Admiralty might deem Sapphire redundant to the needs of the Royal Navy if she was forced to sit idle long enough for a new mast to be fashioned for her, and relegate her to an un-armed troop ship or harbour hulk, jerking his quarterdeck right out from under his feet, and casting him ashore on half-pay in the middle of an active commission! Can’t have that! Lewrie fretted to himself; She’s still a good fightin’ ship, we’ve proved that, over and over, and her crew’s been honed t’the peak of perfection, with the best gunners ever I did see! In point of fact, Lewrie had gotten her six months into her re-commissioning, when her former Captain and First Officer had shot each other in a duel—piss-poor shooting on their parts—and she was now about one year from the necessity of being de-commissioned and turned over to some dockyard graving dock for a complete rebuild before some other Captain got her, in one form or the other. Lewrie knew he only had a year of commanding her left before being forced to give her up, anyway, but he wanted that one last year, dearly! To The First Secretary of The Admiralty, The Honourable Mr. H. H. W. Pole, Sir, it is my Duty to Inform you and The Lords of Admiralty further anent the damage which my Ship suffered on passage from Corunna to Portsmouth. The lower mast, sadly, is so damaged that it must be drawn out and replaced. I am assured by the Surveyor of the Dockyard that it can, and shall be, speedily replaced and that HMS Sapphire can return to full Service as soon as that is done. Well, he sorta promised, didn’t he? Lewrie qualified, tongue firmly planted in one cheek; It ain’t an outright lie! He mulled over how much more he could add, but there was an interruption. His Marine sentry stamped boots, musket butt, and shouted “Cap’um’s Cook t’see th’ Cap’um, SAH!” “Enter,” Lewrie called back, and James Yeovill came into the great-cabins, shaking flakes of snow from his watchcoat and swiping a shapeless wool cap from his long and frizzy hair which was bound back with a hank of ribbon into what looked like a fox’s brush. “Thought you might not mind a cup of hot broth, sir,” Yeovill offered. “I would, indeed, Yeovill,” Lewrie perked up, for his mug of tea was empty, at last, and the cabins were still chilly. “Bring it on! What’s planned for supper?” “That would depend on whether you’re of a mind to dine some of your officers in, tonight, sir,” Yeovill said, coming to the desk with his offering. “No, just me
 and the beasts, tonight,” Lewrie told him. “Nothing in the way of a salad, sir, the last greens have gone over.” Yeovill ticked off on his fingers. “But I thought that a soup of salt beef could start it, then a quail or a rabbit, your choice, would go down well, and there are some decent potatoes left, along with garbanzos, that lot of Spanish chick peas we took aboard at Gibraltar are still in quantity and quality. There’s shore bread come aboard, and I can do a bread pudding with caramel sauce.” “Rabbit, if it’s a fat one,” Lewrie decided. Long ago he had been advised by a senior officer to stock his share of the manger with both rabbits and quail, for they bred and matured rapidly. “The cat, and Bisquit will find rabbit toothsome, too. Along with their sausages or jerky, o’ course. Sounds grand. I leave it to you to produce another of your miracles.” “Aye, sir,” Yeovill said, turning to go. “Has it started to snow, again?” Lewrie asked, taking note of the back and shoulders of Yeovill’s watchcoat. “Off and on, sir,” Yeovill said with a grin. “And thank God for a warm galley, even one with Mister Tanner in charge of it.” Bisquit whined and whuffled at Yeovill’s side before he left the cabins; he was smart enough to be friends with the source of all good treats, and all those delicious smells! Once he was gone, the dog padded round about a couple of times and settled down in front of Lewrie’s desk, on the deep and soft Turkey carpet. Lewrie read over what he’d written, wondering if there was anything more to add, wondering if going further would be “gilding the lily”, or sounding a tad too desperately smarmy to keep his ship. “Shore messenger t’see the Cap’um, SAH!” the Marine sentry bellowed, slamming boots and musket butt on the deck. “Christ, what now? Enter!” Lewrie shouted back. A shivering, teeth-chattering Midshipman came in, hat under his arm, and advanced to the desk as Lewrie rose to his feet. “A message from the flagship presently in port, sir,” the Mid told him as he handed over a wax-sealed letter. “There are at least twelve senior Post-Captains that have come in with the Admiral and his squadron, and in two days they will sit aboard the flag to hold examinations for all qualifying Midshipmen.” “In two days,” Lewrie queried, opening the sealed letter and discovering pretty-much what the Mid had just stated. “I’ve several who will eagerly attend, and thankee for bringing news of it, young sir. Mister…?” “Tominy, sir, George Tominy,” the Mid replied. “Thinkin’ of tryin’ your luck, yourself, are you, Mister Tominy?” Lewrie jested. “I lack a year on ship’s books before I could, sir,” Tominy said with a moue of disappointment, and a shrug. “Well, you’ll have your turn, in time,” Lewrie assured him. “Thanks again, Mister Tominy.” “Thank you, sir,” the Mid said, and headed for the door, and the foul weather. He was snow-flaked, too, Lewrie noted. A Midshipman’s Board, well well, Lewrie thought; And is there a chance that I can get rid of Midshipman Hillhouse, at long last? Oh, just please Jesus! It wasn’t that Hillhouse was not competent, no; he was one of the oldest and most experienced of Sapphire’s ten Mids, well into his mid-twenties. Hillhouse’s problem was that he seemed to have a bad case of the “sulks” over his few chances to shine and be mentioned in reports, to command a prize into harbour, be given grander duties. “Jessop?” Lewrie called out to his cabin servant. “I’d admire did ye run this letter down to the Mid’s cockpit, and inform them that if letters of recommendation are desired, they should let me know at once.” “Me, sir?” Jessop replied, sounding put-upon. “Oh, aye, sir.” He took the letter, found his wool watch coat for his brief exposure to the foul weather, and dashed away. Lewrie looked over his damage report to Admiralty some more, wondering if he could hint that his proficient, and well-drilled, crew and their impeccable gunnery skills would prove valuable, and deadly to the French, and should be kept together and gotten back to sea, instanter. Is that beggin’, or boastin’? Lewrie pondered. He dipped his precious steel-nibbed pen in the inkwell and began to add to his report, but Chalky got over his fear of the sleeping dog, left the comfort of the bed-cot, and leapt into Lewrie’s lap without even a warning mew or trill. Lewrie’s hand was jounced, and a large glop of ink spoiled the report. “Damme, but you’re a hazard,” Lewrie said with a weary sigh as he balled up that sheet of paper and tossed it aside. He gave Chalky some long strokes along his back and tickled his jowls and cheeks, anyway, getting him settled into a white-furred pot-roast atop the desk before pulling out a fresh sheet to begin again. The door opened, admitting an icy blast as Jessop returned, shaking snow from his coat like a dog shedding rain, and emitting an audible Brr! “They’s three wantin’ letters, sir,” he said, handing over the letter, with the aspirants’ names now pencilled in at the bottom. “Oh, good,” Lewrie said, groaning faintly. “More scribblin’ to do.” “Niver saw such a pig-sty me whole life, sir,” Jessop went on, sounding offended. “Ever’thing hangin’ on pegs’r spillin’ outa their sea chests, filth in ev’ry corner, an’ it stinks worse’n a corpse’s armpit. Don’t think they ever sponge off. You oughta do somethin’ about it, sir. Why, even the tablecloth ain’t white, anywhere you look, nothin’ but stains an’ spills, an’ their steward … he were cleanin’ the meat fork by stabbin’ it through the tablecloth t’get some crusty black stuff off’n it!” “Don’t be bothering the Captain with all that,” Pettus said, making a shushing motion over his mouth. “Mister Kibworth, sir,” the outraged Jessop went further, ignoring the warning, “he wuz drinkin’ cider outa a glass so filthy it’d gone brown, an’ when Mister Leverett wanted some, he had nought but an old shoe t’drink from, an’ they laughed an’ said they all used shoes when they got soup, ’coz Mister Kibworth had the only glass left!” “And someday, God willing, Jessop,” Lewrie told him with glee, and remembrance of his own Midshipman days, “they will all become exalted Post-Captains … if they don’t poison themselves, first. That is very much like what I saw back in my day. You’ve been spoiled.” “Spoiled, sir?” Jessop said, cocking his head to one side. “The way Pettus keeps these cabins, how neatly, and cleanly,” Lewrie told him, “My father’s country house, the way the Coneys keep the Old Ploughman back in Anglesgreen. You’re used to it, by now.” “Oh, Well, s’pose I am, then,” Jessop agreed after a long ponder. He had wandered into a “rondy”, a tavern hired out for recruiting volunteers, when Lewrie was fitting out his last frigate, HMS Reliant, in early 1803, before the Peace of Amiens was broken, and Britain went back to war with Napoleonic France. He’d been a street waif, living hand-to-mouth and sleeping rough wherever he could lay his head, nigh-illiterate, and completely alone in life, filthy in clothes and body, and lice-ridden. A thorough wash under a hose from the wash-deck pump had made him screech in horror after he had come aboard and had scrawled a shaky attempt at his name in the ship’s muster book. Now, though, Jessop was almost sleek with good living, and a guaranteed three meals a day, with meat four days a week, dressed in clean “pusser’s slops”, shod and stockinged, with a short blue coat with brass buttons, a flat, tarred hat on his head, and, as a ship’s servant, he had “all night in” to sleep soundly in a corner of the upper gun deck near the Marine complement. Jessop even had something to aspire to, learning his knots, learning to box the points of the compass, to hand and reef, if not yet steer, to go aloft as agile as a monkey, and serve as a member of one of the starboard carronades’ gun crew. He’d also learned to chew tobacco, drink to excess, curse as grandly as a Bosun’s Mate, and had gotten himself two very nautical tattoos, and on shore liberty at Gibraltar, had taken runs at the whores. “Lay the table, Jessop,” Pettus ordered, “and mind that the settings are clean.” Lewrie re-wrote his letter to the First Secretary, carefully fudging the wording on the second try, and signing his name and “the etcs” at the bottom, pleased with the result. He reached into a side drawer for sealing wax and a seal, weighing whether he would use the plain one with only his initials, or the one that bore his crest of knighthood. Knighthood, and a baronet to boot! Most gentlemen of his ilk would leap over the moon to hold such an honour, would fight and claw to attain such a gift from King George, but it had always left a bad taste in Lewrie’s mouth, suspecting the reason for his elevation to be a cynical, back-handed sop from the government. And, there was too much lost. He and Reliant had been part of a four-ship squadron ordered to seek and bring to battle a French squadron rumoured to be sailing for Spanish Louisiana to reclaim that vast territory, and the strategically sited city of New Orleans, in exchange for some duchy where a relative of Spanish King Carlos could hang his new crown. They’d found them after weeks of fruitless cruising, just off the Chandeleur Islands near the Eastern pass into the Mississippi River, and beaten them quite handily. Since it had been the first, and nigh the only, significant sea action that year, all the national papers were full of it for days, and the victors were lauded to the skies … Captain Blanding, their Commodore, had been certain to be knighted. Lewrie, though, even in command of the most powerful of the three frigates present, putative second-in-command, usually could not expect to be included, but, oddly, he was. He knew why. Lewrie and his wife, Caroline, had reconciled after years of bitter recriminations over his extra-marital dalliances, and had gone to Paris for a “honeymoon”. He still didn’t know
 quite what he had done to anger Napoleon Bonaparte when presented at the Tuileries Palace to exchange dead French officers’ swords for a hanger that Lewrie had had to surrender into Bonaparte’s hands at Toulon years before, but they’d been warned to flee at once, and with the aid of a fraudulent Sir Pulteney Plumb, who styled himself as “The Yellow Tansy”, and his wife they had made it to Calais in one disguise after another, and almost into a waiting rowboat, where the French caught up with them with orders to kill them, and Caroline had been shot in the back and died minutes later as the boat neared a waiting schooner. The papers had been full of that, too, for days; NAVAL HERO AND WIFE PURSUED UNDER DEATH SENTENCE, WIFE SLAIN BY PERFIDIOUS FRENCH ON ORDERS OF THE CORSICAN OGRE. And it went on being beaten like a drum as England had prepared to go back to war, on and on, mentioned in the same breath with which nation would keep Malta, demands for France to end their occupation of Switzerland, and an host of depredations and atrocities the French had been capable of. Much like Lewrie forever being a somewhat useful “gun dog” to the agents from the Foreign Office’s Secret Branch over the years, he had been useful to stir the nation’s patriotic fervour, and his wife’s death had been … productive! Even fortuitous! So, Lewrie had found himself a year later at Saint James’s Palace in un-accustomed silk finery, with an irritating powdered wig, kneeling before King George the Third and a bored Prince of Wales who had seemed more concerned with the dirt under his fingernails, and it had turned into a shambolic farce, for the King was having one of his bad days, and after dubbing several before Lewrie with baronies, knighthoods, and baronetcies, it must have stuck in his head, so when the dangerously swinging Sword of State had touched Lewrie’s shoulders (very near his ears!) out had come “Knight and Baronet”, which was repeated several times in search of the proper word to emphasize, then a question from his Sovereign as to why he was on his knees in front of him. He was told in an anteroom moments later that the Crown did not “err”, which had been pronounced much like “grr” and there it was, what what? Well, it cost me enough, Lewrie sadly thought as the stick of wax was melting over a candle; the fees for such honours at the College of Heralds for his crest, ring, and seal had been horrendously steep. He dripped a large blob of hot blue wax over the fold of the letter, then chose the crest seal to press into it. One down, three to go, he told himself with a sigh as he began to scribble praise for Midshipman Leverett. “More tea, sir?” Pettus asked in a soft voice, sidling up to the desk with the shiny pewter pot. “Aye, fill me back up,” Lewrie said with his head down over his writing, wondering just what he could say for Hillhouse that would improve his chances of promotion.

Lambdin, Dewey (2016-02-01T22:58:59). A Hard, Cruel Shore: An Alan Lewrie Naval Adventure (Alan Lewrie Naval Adventures) (Kindle Locations 60-342). St. Martin's Press. Kindle Edition. 

The night had turned unseasonally chilly. Captain Sir Thomas Kydd sat before the fire with his particular friend, the Earl of Farndon, and his wife, who also happened to be Sir Thomas’s sister. The evening’s reception and stately ball had been accounted the most splendid held for many years, and he’d been introduced to a dizzying quantity of the county’s highest society, who’d been particularly attentive to the acclaimed sea hero. But now he gazed vacantly into the flames. ‘Are you not enjoying your Armagnac, Thomas?’ Cecilia asked in concern. ‘Nicholas keeps back his ’seventy-nine for your visits alone, my dear.’ ‘Pray take no notice of me, sis. I’m in a complicated mood.’ ‘Oh? What can this mean?’ she teased. ‘To tell it straight, Cec, my intellects are in a whirl for all the fanfaronade since we made port, and I’ve a mort of things to think on. I confess what I crave most is nothing more than to sit and stare at a wall for above a day.’ ‘Well, I’ll allow the lot of a public hero is an active one.’ Lord Farndon – or Nicholas Renzi as he would always be known to his bosom friend – set down his glass and smiled indulgently. ‘Now, my dear fellow, you cannot persuade me that it was all of it a burden beyond bearing. I do recollect your distinct pleasure in telling me of the subscription dinner by members of the Exchange and the presentation of silver at its conclusion.’ ‘Yes, that was handsomely done. Baltic traders at the Virginia and Baltick in Threadneedle Street in appreciation of my contribution to the safeguarding of their interests, even if I’m at a loss to fathom why an action in support of the Prussians counts as that.’ ‘But that nasty fuss in the newspapers!’ Cecilia added, her face stormy. ‘Such words about your—’ ‘Those scurvy villains are a contemptible crew and I’ll thank you to pay no mind to ’em, sis.’ Recalling the bitter turmoil that had followed a True Briton report of Kydd’s opinions after the notorious Popham trial, Renzi chuckled. ‘Well, that’s certainly no longer of any consequence to your sea prospects. Have you not received an intimation of the Admiralty’s entire satisfaction at your conduct?’ ‘I did that,’ Kydd agreed. ‘A private letter from the first lord wishing to assure me of his continued interest in my naval career.’ ‘Just so.’ ‘And this is a rum one, Nicholas. Lord Camden, somebody big in government, wants me to be a Member of Parliament in the Tory interest.’ ‘Why not, Thomas?’ Cecilia squealed. ‘You’d make a splendid figure standing up in the House with a speech as will make the scoundrels sit up and listen.’ ‘No, sis. I’ve no hankering after arguments all the day long. Besides, when will I have time to take Tyger to sea?’ Renzi looked fondly at his friend. ‘So, Kydd of the Tyger it is, to be sure. Long may he sail the high seas against the King’s enemies!’ There was a trace of wistful envy in his voice, which Kydd knew came not from any wish to be a celebrated hero like himself but the knowledge that he could no longer taste the freedom of the sea in all its lure and mystery. ‘On another matter entirely,’ Renzi added quickly. ‘You said Toby Stirk – or is that Gunner’s Mate Stirk – did survive his injury?’ Renzi and Stirk had been with Kydd since his first days as a pressed man, and Renzi had seen him learn much from the leathery old seaman. ‘He did, Nicholas. Hard as nails but he was sadly knocked about and dead to the world for near two days. Came round after we arrived at Sheerness. We had the devil’s own job getting the beggar to agree to go ashore to the hospital for observing, and only my personal vow he wouldn’t be removed for another in Tyger had him off.’ Renzi gave a half-smile. ‘Dear fellow, I own I’m at the loftiest rank of society but there are moments I’d give it all away to possess the true-hearted devotion of the ship’s company of a fighting frigate like Tyger …’ Chapter 2 The next day Kydd took coach in neat but anonymous gentleman’s dress. After the near hopeless battle against three frigates and the following desperate days nursing a wounded Tyger to her refuge, he craved space to find himself again, to get away somewhere blessedly remote, where the ferocious wars of Napoleon Bonaparte were another world, and to feel something of the old times when the only concerns were the success of the harvests and the jollities of market day. Tyger was under repair but had been given precedence by an Admiralty keen to show its intention of setting one of its most famous frigate captains at sea again as soon as may be. It had been classed a ‘small repair’, even though she’d suffered untold injuries, for, apart from a docking to replace the damaged strake between wind and water, there was nothing that would require taking down her hull. Nevertheless, an unknown number of weeks would pass until he could claim her. Before he could let the benison of rest do its healing, Kydd needed to journey to Sheerness to visit the hospital where so many Tygers were paying the price for his triumph. The last mile across the marshes from Queenborough brought back memories of the dark year of the great Nore mutiny where his destiny had changed irrevocably: from the prospect of a noose at the yard-arm to the felicity of treading the quarterdeck as a king’s officer. It was humbling to be received joyfully by men with shattered limbs who would never again work a long splice or race aloft in the teeth of a gale for the honour of their ship. They would be turned ashore, the lucky ones to a berth in Greenwich Hospital, others to a sailor’s sad exile on land. ‘The gunner’s mate on your books,’ Kydd asked an orderly. ‘Tobias Stirk. Is he still here, by chance?’ ‘Don’t rightly know. Gets these moods, like. Drifts off an’ no one knows where till he returns. Odd sort – and claims he won’t be bound by no long-shore coves tellin’ him what to do. I’ll see if ’n he’s about.’ He wasn’t, and Kydd felt the stir of unease for the hard and fearless seaman of old, now taken with phantoms of doubt and mortality and wandering abroad in a futile effort to lay them to rest. He couldn’t leave without at least wishing his old shipmate a good recovery. There was a drawing room for the families of visitors and Kydd settled in a chair to wait. On the table were newspapers and old issues of the Gentleman’s Magazine. He flicked through one but when he saw his name in it he turned it face down, embarrassed, and picked up another. From time to time, curious staff offered refreshments, with well-meant platitudes. Dusk drew in and a lamp was brought. He knew he should think about leaving: his continued presence would be causing awkwardness for the hospital. Should he write Stirk a note, perhaps a light touch about the time when they were both foremast hands in the old Duke William? Or not: he had remembered the man’s sense of pride and— A figure appeared in the doorway, difficult to make out by the light of the single lamp. ‘Mr Stirk?’ ‘Aye. They said y’ wanted t’ see me.’ The husky voice was defensive and Stirk removed his shapeless hat awkwardly. ‘Do come in and sit, Mr Stirk,’ Kydd said, wondering whether it had been such a mercy to seek the man out after all. Stirk came forward into the light but remained standing. He was not in his usual comfortable seaman’s rig, instead wearing a shabby dark coat and a muffler. His eyes glittered in deep-sunken pits. ‘I – I came to see how you were, Mr Stirk,’ Kydd ventured. It sounded affected before the reality of the fine old seaman who stood before him. ‘Sir. Nothin’ that can’t be put right by a spell o’ canvas-backing.’ This was a sailor’s term for taking refuge in his hammock. ‘They’re saying you’re out and about a lot. Are you—’ ‘Got no right t’ tell you that,’ Stirk grated. ‘Poxy bastards! Sir.’ It was ridiculous, Kydd thought, for him to be sitting at his ease in an armchair while a man he admired more than most stood before him like a felon. Kydd got to his feet. ‘Are you in want of anything, Mr Stirk? Prize money is a long time coming and—’ ‘I’m right ’n’ tight, Mr Kydd,’ he replied flatly. ‘Well, then—’ ‘An’ I thanks ye for the askin’ of it.’ Was that a glimmering of feeling in his voice? ‘So you’ll be off soon to see your folk, I’d guess,’ Kydd chanced. ‘I might.’ ‘How are they all? Romney Marsh, isn’t it? A fine place this time of year.’ ‘Cap’n. It was right dimber of ye to see me, an’ I’ll not keep ye any longer.’ His voice had dropped so low Kydd struggled to hear. He wanted to reach out to Stirk but there seemed an unbridgeable gulf between them. The tough, indomitable figure was bearing the strain of something beyond his mastering but was trapped in the husk of his own iron-hard character. ‘Well, yes, time to leave,’ Kydd said. Then he paused as if contemplating a sudden idea. ‘To tell the truth, I’m off to seek a mort of quiet to settle my thoughts. I’m looking for a place to stay as is peaceful and out of the way. What do you say to Hythe by the Marsh?’ There was no response, merely a steady gaze from unblinking black eyes. ‘Stage to Maidstone, another to the coast, as I remember. Oh, and I’d be gratified should we travel together,’ he added casually. If he could just get Stirk to his family … ‘No.’ ‘May I know why not?’ Was the distance between them too much? ‘’Cos we don’t live there any more.’ ‘Where …?’ There was the slightest hesitation, then: ‘Scotland. Dunlochry.’ ‘I’m not certain I’ve heard of it.’ ‘Had to skin out o’ the Marsh. Revenoo took against m’ young bro. Had t’ quick find somewhere quiet, like.’ Kydd held silent for a moment. ‘Quiet? This Dunlochry sounds just the place to lay up for a while and hoist in some peace.’ ‘You’d be going all the ways up there?’ Stirk said slowly, the sunken eyes never leaving his. ‘The barky’s in for some weeks. I’ve got the time.’ The moment hung. ‘It’s a wee place. They’ll realise you’re—’ ‘I’ll go as plain Mr Thomas Paine,
 heading north with my old friend Tobias Stirk. No one to know else. Right?’ Chapter 3 It was days on the road by the Glasgow mail, but there was little opportunity to talk because Stirk had taken it upon himself to ride outside. They ate together at the stops but Stirk was still held in some sort of inner thrall that did not admit others: he answered only in monosyllables. Then it was two days in a cramped, fast packet to the new whisky-distillery town of Oban on the Firth of Lorne in the Hebrides. Kydd stood on the little quay in the tentative sunshine. The wild beauty of the Western Isles reached out to him, ramparts of blue hills, islets beyond counting and an unutterable sense of remoteness. If he was going to lay the ghosts of the recent past it would be here. Stirk had left him with the baggage and returned a little later. ‘Thought I’d turn up the little scroat in the Three Bushels,’ he rasped. With him was a wild-eyed youth, who regarded Kydd with suspicion. ‘Mr Paine – this’n is Jeb, m’ younger brother. An’ Jeb, Mr Paine’s a gent who’s come here for a spell o’ resting. Now, you minds y’r manners – he’s an old matey o’ mine and I’ll not have him vexed b’ your rowdy ways.’ Stirk humped their baggage to the end of the quay and dropped it into a half-deck ketch strewn with fishing gear. Without a word he swarmed down a mooring line and landed lightly on the after end. Not hesitating, Kydd did the same. Jeb looked on with respect. ‘As ye’ve been a sailor, then, Mr Paine,’ he said, as he alighted and went forward to see to the lines. Before he threw off the tiller beckets, Stirk lifted up a corner of the untidy mass of nets to reveal three small casks. He spluttered an oath. ‘Ye just can’t leave it alone, can ye, y’ clinking fool?’ He let the nets drop and spat pointedly over the side. ‘I see any more an’ you’re out o’ here, cully!’ A black mood descended, and Stirk set sullenly about the hoisting of sails and casting off. Kydd took the main-sheet and they leaned to the wind and out into the choppy waters of the firth. The scenery was dramatic. Caught by the sun the bare Hebridean islands lay with spreading pale beaches and black rocks stretching seaward, throwing up surf in vivid white against the deep green of the sea, the more distant islands scattered in a romantic misty blue-grey. Despite its beauty, the seaman in Kydd knew it could all change within minutes: the dark skerries at the edge of the islets would turn to cruel fangs to tear out the bowels of any vessel lost in the murk. They made good speed, the red sails board-taut, and the breeding of the plain but stout Scottish fishing boat shone through. Kydd slid along to Stirk at the tiller. ‘What’s her name?’ He thought the big man hadn’t heard but then came a gruff, ‘Maid o’ Lorne. As belongs t’ my sister’s husband.’ ‘Sister?’ ‘It’s what I said, didn’t I?’ Stirk caught himself and turned to him, stricken. ‘Sorry, Mr K—Paine. Didn’t mean t’ go ye. Ain’t m’self lately.’ His hand fidgeted on the tiller. ‘Jeb’s to take her out wi’ some island younkers as crew, like. Herring, and long-lining for haddock and whiting, mebbe some cod.’ At the fore Jeb looked obstinately away. He’d given up the helm and authority of the boat without question to Stirk, and Kydd sensed there was much not being said. ‘How far’s your Dunlochry?’ Kydd asked Stirk. ‘This’n is the Sound o’ Mull.’ He gestured at the long sea passage ahead. ‘We’s on the outer coast t’ larb’d.’ They emerged into the open waters and the power of the Atlantic’s vast reaches: a massive swell, wind-driven to surging white-tipped waves. As though born to it, Maid conformed in an easy long lift and fall, effortless in her economic movements. This was a different realm from the close lochs and firths of the inner isles – more remote, a wildness Kydd had never seen before. He suppressed a smile at the thought of how Renzi would react to them: the sublimity would, without a doubt, have brought on a paean or two, even if his friend was as aware as he himself was of their deadly character to the unwary mariner. Chapter 4 Dunlochry, Isle of Mull, Scotland By the time they had reached the sharp foreland pointed out as the entrance to Dunlochry, Kydd had prised most of the story out of Stirk. His sister, Constance, had married a Scot who held a valuable position as gamekeeper to the laird of the Isle of Mull. They lived in an estate cottage. When Jeb’s difficulties with the Revenue had cropped up, he had thought to come here and lie low with his sister, the understanding being that he would make his way by working the Maid. It had not been a complete success, Stirk’s younger brother being so headstrong and unreliable. ‘And your folks?’ Kydd asked politely. ‘A year or so back, in Kent. Ain’t no more.’ ‘And so …’ ‘These ’ere are all the kin I got.’ Around the point a deeply indented bay opened up, snugly sheltered between weathered dark cliffs by a twist of topography. Steep tree-stippled slopes converged on a small village with a tiny jetty and a gaggle of boats at moorings in the barely ruffled inlet. They dropped the mainsail and glided in, the smell of pines, heather and the stink of fish mingled with the smoke of peat-fires coming out to enfold them in a fragrant welcome. Curious eyes watched them disembark. As Stirk straightened, there was a hail, and a short, stout individual lumbered across. ‘Wha’ hae, m’ fine friend!’ he puffed, clapping Stirk familiarly on the shoulder. ‘Away wi’ ye, but it’s bin a hoora long time.’ Shrewd eyes swept over Kydd. ‘Then who’s this’n?’ The Scottish burr had fallen away to a more understandable English at Kydd’s appearance. ‘It’s … an old navy shipmate. Name o’ Paine.’ ‘Aye. Well, pleased t’ take the hand of owt who knows Toby, Mr Paine.’ Stirk introduced him to Kydd. ‘This is Brian McFadden. We calls ’im Laddie. Hails from the south, like we. Owns the fishing boat, Aileen G,’ he added. Kydd shook hands, taking in the hard, calloused grip. The life of a fisherman would be far from easy in these waters. ‘Mr Paine, I’d be obliged should ye go wi’ Laddie to the White Lion in town while I sees m’ sister, like. Pony an’ trap will be along for ye after.’ Stirk lifted his sea-bag and swung it over his shoulder, then stumped off up the hill out of Dunlochry. ‘I’ll be takin’ your bags an’ all, Mr Paine,’ McFadden said, rapidly sizing Kydd up. ‘Nowt to worry on.’ The diminutive village consisted of a short main street – a church at the higher end and two taphouses by the waterfront, with several shops between in an uneven row of houses. The late-afternoon sun had tempted several patrons to take their beer at the tables outside and they looked up with guarded curiosity. Inside the White Lion a comfortable stink of sawdust and beer toppings lay thickly on the air, and there was an animated hum of conversation from the men at the tables. A fiddler played to himself in a corner and a tapster idly cleaned the counter. As they found a table, talk tailed off and faces turned: creased, work-worn features, characterful and wary. ‘What can I get you, Mr McFadden?’ Kydd asked. It fell into a stony silence. The man stared back at him, unblinking. ‘A beer – or is it a whisky you Scots prefer?’ Feeling every eye on him, Kydd started to ask again but then eased into a smile. ‘I’m sorry, Laddie, I didn’t ask properly, did I?’ McFadden’s weathered face split into a grin. ‘Aye, ye dinnae.’ He swivelled around and called loudly to the tapster, ‘A shant o’ gatter, twice, Angus lad.’ The conversations about them resumed. The beer was dark and strong. Kydd relished it, after so long with fine wines, and eased back in his chair. He allowed McFadden to make the running. It turned out that Stirk had come to his rescue in a street brawl in his youth. Stirk’s family was liked in Dunlochry, even if they kept to themselves most of the time. And if it wasn’t too personal, could he know how Mr Paine, with the cut of the gent about him, had got to know the likes of Toby Stirk? It was easy enough recounted. In perfect truth he told of his press-ganging into Duke William and Stirk’s inspiration to him as a young seaman. Their ways had parted but they’d met again, and Kydd, being of a mind to seek a spell of peace, had come up here with him. ‘So ye’ve done well out o’ Boney’s war, then, Mr Paine?’ ‘Better than some,’ was all Kydd would say, giving a saintly smile. True to his word, Stirk soon arrived with the pony and trap. ‘Ah, Connie’s fine an’ all, but ’ud be much obliged if you asks accommodation here, seein’ as the cottage ain’t in proper shape t’ have ye stay.’ ‘Of course.’ ‘An’ begs you’ll sup wi’ us tonight.’ It was a long drive up a rutted road not much better than a sheep run, through glens and around the bare crests of hills to the edge of a wood. The stone cottage was snug and well-kept; a vegetable garden laid out in orderly rows among a bright profusion of foxgloves. A whitewashed kitchen was hung with hams and spotless copper utensils. The neat and colourfully ornamented rooms spoke of tranquillity and contentment.

Stockwin, Julian (2016-09-14T23:58:59). Inferno: A Kydd Sea Adventure, Book 17 (Kydd Sea Adventures) (Kindle Locations 99-289). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

IT WAS AS IF THE HANDSOME FRIGATE knew that she and her two-hundred-odd company were going home. After leaving the Caribbean she had quickly picked up a reliable westerly and now hitched up her skirt and flew, overtaking the broad Atlantic waves one by one in an eager swooping that had even old hands moving cautiously about the deck. Channel fever was aboard and it gripped every soul. Soon after the chaos and drama of Trafalgar, HMS L’Aurore had been sent to join an expedition to wrest Cape Town from the Dutch. Success there had not been matched by the following ill-starred attempt at the South American colonies of Spain, and after capturing the capital, Buenos Aires, they had been forced to an ignominious surrender. Their later few months of service in the Caribbean had been abruptly terminated in an Admiralty summons to return to England. No doubt her captain was wanted at the vengeful court-martial to follow. But at last the handsome frigate and her crew were homeward bound. Standing braced on the quarterdeck, Captain Thomas Kydd tried to take pleasure in the seething onrush of his fine command but he couldn’t shake a feeling of foreboding. A snatch of song floated aft. The men were in good heart. They had served nobly in all three actions and could rely on liberty and prize-money to spend while L’Aurore received overdue attentions from the dockyard. Her captain, however, could only look forward to— “How now, old horse! Do I see you the only one aboard downcast at the prospect of England?” His old friend and confidential secretary, Nicholas Renzi, had come on deck to join him. They’d shared countless adventures since they’d met as common seamen so long ago and had no secrets between them. “England? Why, not at all— it’s rather what’s lying in wait there that troubles me.” “The court-martial.” “Quite. We gave it our best against the Spanish but lost. And our leader to be crucified for quitting station— if we’d prevailed it would have been overlooked, but the Admiralty will never forgive us now.” Kydd gave a bitter smile. “There’s above half a dozen captains who’ll bear witness that I was in league with the commodore. It’s beyond believing that they’ll stop at only a single one to pay.” “Possibly. But L’Aurore has done valiantly since, which should ease their lordships’ wrath a trifle.” “You think so? They won’t yet have learned of our putting down the sugar-trade threat, and while we did stoutly at Curaçao, who’s ever heard of the island, let alone Marie Galante? No, m’ friend, after Trafalgar the country expects nothing less than victory, every time!” “It might not be as bad as—” “Don’t top it the comforter, Nicholas. I’ll take it, whatever comes. It’s … it’s just that it would grieve me beyond telling should I lose L’Aurore.”

Stockwin, Julian (2014-11-01). Pasha: A Kydd Sea Adventure (Kydd Sea Adventures Book 15) (Kindle Locations 111-136). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

“That would put us both in a pickle, I’m persuaded,” Renzi said. “For at this particular time I’m obliged to say there are no shining prospects in store for me at all. I’ll not hide that I’m disappointed my novel was not received more warmly. It did seem to me a sprightly little volume, but the public’s taste is never to be commanded.” “Well, I thought it a rattling good yarn, Nicholas! Are you sure?” “It’s been over a year and I’ve heard not a thing.” Renzi’s head dropped. It was no use pining, though: he had to accept he was clearly not destined to be a novelist. “But there’s one thing you can look forward to.” “Oh?” “Nicholas, sometimes you try the patience of a saint! You seem to have forgotten your promise!” “My … ?” “Yes, your promise that when we touched port in England,” he ground out, “you would that day post to Guildford and lay your heart before Cecilia.” Nothing would please Kydd more than to see the long attachment between his sister and his particular friend brought to a satisfactory conclusion. “Yes, of course,” Renzi said awkwardly. “I’d not forgotten. But …” “Yes?” Kydd said, his voice rising. “Well, in the absence of prospects, I rather thought—” “Nicholas, dear fellow,” he barked, “if you’re not on a Guildford coach within one hour of our casting lines ashore I’ll ask Mr Clinton for a file of marines who will personally escort you there. Am I being clear enough?” It was the age-old excitement of landfall. A screamed hail from the volunteer masthead lookout, whose height-of-eye was more than that of the legitimate watch-keeper in the fore-top, sent pulses racing. The man would later claim his reward from the tots of his shipmates. The pace of their homecoming quickened: now England would be in sight constantly, the well-known seamarks passing in succession until they reached the great anchorage at Portsmouth— Spithead. The Needles, white and stark against the winter grey, were Kydd’s reminder that within hours all would be made clear. The order that had reached out to him in the Caribbean would have been followed by another, now waiting in the port admiral’s office. Relieved of his command pending court-martial? Open arrest? Gulping, he realised that these last few sea-miles might very well be the last he would make under the ensign he had served since his youth. Rounding Bembridge Point would bring Spithead into view and, if the fleet was in, he must make his report to the admiral afloat. If they were at sea, it would be to the port admiral in the dockyard. Gun salutes, of course, would be needed in either case. The deck was crowded with men gazing at the passing shoreline, some thoughtful and silent,

Stockwin, Julian (2014-11-01). Pasha: A Kydd Sea Adventure (Kydd Sea Adventures Book 15) (Kindle Locations 136-161). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

others babbling excitedly and laughing. It seemed the entire crew was on deck. “Mr Oakley!” Kydd threw at the boatswain. “Is this a pleasure cruise? Get those men to work this instant!” L’Aurore had long since been willingly prettified to satisfaction but she was a king’s ship and had her standards. And he knew the real reason for his outburst and was sorry for it. Would the crew remember him fondly or … ? The point soon yielded its view of the fleet anchorage— but four ships only and bare of any admiral’s flag. Thus it would be the port admiral to whom he would make his number. Her distinguishing pennants snapping at the mizzen halyards in an impeccable show, L’Aurore rounded to and her anchor plunged into the grey-green water. Everyone knew what must follow but Kydd told them nevertheless. “I shall report and return with orders, Mr Gilbey. No guardo tricks from the men while I’m gone or there’ll be no liberty for any. Secure from sea and I want to see a good harbour stow. Carry on, please.” With a tight stomach he boarded his barge, taking his place in the sternsheets and determined not to show any hint of anxiety. “Bear off,” he growled at his coxswain, Poulden. The boat’s crew seemed to sense the tension and concentrated on their strokes even as they passed close by the raucous jollity of Portsmouth Point. Reaching the familiar jetty oars were tossed in a faultless display and the boat glided in. “Lay off, Poulden,” Kydd ordered, and stepped on to English soil for the first time in what had seemed so long. It had been nearly two years. There was no point in delaying: he turned and strode briskly up the stone steps. At the top, unease gripped him as he saw a line of armed marines ahead. Orders screamed out, muskets clashed, and an officer began marching smartly across. “Captain Kydd. Sah!” “I am he.” “Sah!” The port admiral, accompanied by his flag-lieutenant and other officers, appeared from behind the rigid line of red coats. “Kydd, old fellow! Welcome to England! How are you?” He held out his hand. “We’ve been expecting you this age.” The flag-lieutenant stood to one side in open admiration. “Sah!” “Oh, do inspect Cullin’s guard, there’s a good chap.” There was nothing for it, and with a senior admiral at his side, Kydd did the honours, pacing down the line of marines wearing an expression of being suitably impressed, stopping with a word to one or two. At the end there was a flourish of swords and the party was released to go to the admiral’s reception room. “Sherry?” A sense of unreality was creeping in: had they mistaken him for someone else? “Sir. I thank you for your welcome, very pleasing to me. But

Stockwin, Julian (2014-11-01). Pasha: A Kydd Sea Adventure (Kydd Sea Adventures Book 15) (Kindle Locations 161-187). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

might I enquire why … ?” A small frown creased the port admiral’s forehead. “Do you think me a shab not to recognise a hero of the hour? Let me tell you, sir, since Boney set off his bombshell the public have sore need of same!” “Hero?” Kydd said weakly. “The papers have been in a frenzy for weeks. Curaçao— as dashing an exploit as any in our history! Throwing a few frigates against the might of a Dutchy naval base, sailing right into their harbour in the teeth of moored ships, forts and armies. Then every last captain takes boat, waves his sword amain and storms ashore to carry the day! How can it not thrill the hearts of the entire nation?” “Well, it was a furious enough occasion, I’ll grant you, but—” “Nonsense! A smart action— and deserving of your prize-money,” he added, with a touch of envy. “Sir.” Kydd paused. “Are there orders for L’Aurore at all?” The port admiral turned to his flag-lieutenant. “Yes, sir. I’ll get them instanter.” He was back but not with a pack of detailed orders, just one, folded and sealed with the Admiralty cipher. Kydd signed for it, with only the slightest tremor to his hand. “Do excuse me, sir,” he said, as he stepped aside to read. It was short, almost to the point of rudeness. He was to place his ship under the temporary command of the port admiral forthwith pending refit while he should lose no time in presenting himself in person to the first lord of the Admiralty. His heart bumped. There was a world of difference between a public hero and a naval delinquent and, without doubt, this was going to be the true reckoning. “I’m to report to the first lord without delay. Do pardon me if I take my leave, sir. L’Aurore is to come under your flag until further orders— Lieutenant Gilbey, my premier, will be in command.” “You know the routine, Mr Gilbey. I’m … not sure of future events but ship goes to harbour routine, full liberty to both watches. Don’t be too harsh on ’em.” His first lieutenant touched his hat and left. Renzi watched his friend gravely. “In truth, it doesn’t appear you’re to expect a welcome from their lordships.” “That’s my concern. Get your gear together— we leave in an hour.” “You want me to—” “I’m posting to London. You’re coming with me as far as Guildford, Nicholas.” “You have my promise,” Renzi said, in an injured tone. “Yes. And I have you for a shy cove. You’ll do the deed or I’ll know why!” There was little conversation in the swaying, rattling coach. A cold winter rain beat at the windows and the countryside blurred into

Stockwin, Julian (2014-11-01). Pasha: A Kydd Sea Adventure (Kydd Sea Adventures Book 15) (Kindle Locations 187-213). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

anonymity. Past the little town of Petersfield, Renzi said stiffly, “There’s nothing I can bring to mind that makes my matter the easier to say.” “Fire away nevertheless, Nicholas.” “It’s that … should Cecilia accept me … then, to be brutally frank, I have very little means to support her as a wife, as I keep telling you. Is it morally right then to—” “If she agrees to marry you, I shall settle something on you both— tell her it’s your prize-money portion, if you like.” “That’s very hard to accept, Tom, but nobly offered.” “You’ll take it for her sake, Nicholas.” “Very well.” “And none of your tricks o’ logic. No telling me you’ll marry her right enough, but the wedding day’s only to be when you find the time.” They continued on in companionable silence. Some time later Hindhead appeared out of the driving rain. Renzi turned to Kydd and said, in a low voice, “Whatever is ahead for us both I know not— but the friendship in my heart I will value for all of time.” The whip cracked over the tired horses as they toiled up the steep hill in Guildford Town. The Angel posting-house was halfway up and the coach swung through the arch. The driver cursed as he descended, tearing off his dripping cloak and keeping out of the way of the ostlers. Renzi turned to his friend. “You’ll … ?” “No, Nicholas. I have to get to the Admiralty without a moment lost. I don’t want to disturb my folks only to be off again. After they change horses I’ll be away. Now, you’re going through with—” “You have my solemn word on it.” “Then …” “I wish you well, dear friend. It’s my prayer you’ll still be in possession of a ship at the end of it.” “I never took you for the praying sort, Nicholas, but thank you. And I do wish you every happiness, you and Cecilia both.” They clasped hands, then parted. Renzi turned and left the Angel, crossing the road and taking the short cut through the Tunsgate to the Kydd naval school. His mind raced— even now it was not too late to slink away, avoid the issue entirely, for there was every chance that Cecilia had given up on him, had married another. Or perhaps she was out somewhere in the far reaches of the world with her employer, that diplomat of mysterious assignments, the Marquess of Bloomsbury. Or she might be at home. Hammering at him was one overriding question: was it right to propose marriage dependent on a settlement from his friend? A delicate ethical dilemma: on the one hand there was every moral imperative to decline to pursue his suit but on the other he had given his word to Kydd. He looked up from the rain that drove in his face and found that he was close to the school. He must make up his mind quickly. So much hung

Stockwin, Julian (2014-11-01). Pasha: A Kydd Sea Adventure (Kydd Sea Adventures Book 15) (Kindle Locations 213-239). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

on— A hand touched his arm. Startled, he swung around to see the rosy face of Emily, the Kydds’ maid. “It is! Mr Renzi, as I stand!” she blurted, with a broad smile. “Come t’ visit. Right welcome you are too, sir.” “Do let me assist, my dear,” he said, taking the basket of vegetables she was carrying. “Why, thank you, sir. They’ll be main pleased t’ see you, what with no news about Mr Thomas and such. Have you had tidings a-tall?” There could be no retreating now and he let her prattle wash over him until they reached the door. Unexpectedly, a calm settled. He would go through with it: he would formally propose to Miss Cecilia Kydd. “Why, Mr Renzi!” Mrs Kydd cried. “Do come in out o’ that rain. I’m so pleased to see you— have you any word o’ young Thomas?” she added anxiously. “He’s hale and hearty, Mrs Kydd, let me assure you. He’s important business in London but desires me to convey to you his filial devoirs and promises to visit at the earliest opportunity.” “You’re so wet, Mr Renzi. Emily, run and get a towel for Mr Renzi— quickly now!” “Who’s that, Fanny?” quavered a voice from within. “Why, Mr Renzi, Walter, that’s who,” she replied. “Come into the parlour, Mr Renzi. Sit y’self down while we find you something to warm the cockles.” She ushered him into the small front room, so well known from times before. “You are in good health, Mrs Kydd?” “So-so. I always gets chilblains in this blashy weather, but never you mind.” “And Cecilia?” he asked carefully. “Oh? Yes, she’s fine. Now do tell us where you’ve gone to these last— bless my soul, it must be coming on for two years now.” “A long story, and I’d much rather it were Thomas in the telling.” He paused, “Might I enquire, what does Cecilia these days?” “Poor lamb. She had a fine position, as y’ know, with the marquess an’ lady, but now they can’t travel so she’s been let go with an encomium. Spends her days about the house moping— she should get out and find herself a man, if y’ pardon my speaking so direct.” “Is she here? I’d like to pay my respects.” “She was. Gone out to see a friend— she’ll be back soon, I’ll not wonder.” Renzi’s heart skipped a beat. “Emily!” Mrs Kydd called in exasperation. “Where’s that posset? Mr Renzi here is a-dyin’ from the cold an’ wet. I’ll give you a hand.” She bustled out, leaving Renzi alone. He looked about: was there anything that spoke of Cecilia’s presence, that was hers? He was now about to face the one who had captured his heart, and a sudden wave of emotion engulfed him. He loved the woman: he adored her, was hopelessly lost to her. And he would propose, go on bended knee— but what if she

Stockwin, Julian (2014-11-01). Pasha: A Kydd Sea Adventure (Kydd Sea Adventures Book 15) (Kindle Locations 239-266). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

turned him down? Desolation clamped in. Refusal was a very real chance: this was a hard world where marriages were largely contracted on the basis of income expectations and a lady would be considered a fool to marry beneath her station. Even were Cecilia still to bear him an affection, she had her future to consider and … A lump rose in his throat. It wouldn’t be long and he would know her answer— and if it was unfavourable, his heart would surely be broken. In a frenzy of apprehension he looked again to see if there was anything of her in the room. She must spend hours here, sitting— needlework? Not Cecilia, her mind was too active. What did other young ladies do in her circumstances? Drawing? Piano? There was neither here. He knew so little of her at home … What was that, peeping out from under the cushion? A book, shoved under in haste to conceal it, almost certainly what she’d been reading. Guiltily Renzi pulled it out. It was a novel of sorts, the cover gold-embossed with a romantic manly figure standing atop a rock. He felt a tinge of disappointment that it was a work of fiction she was reading rather than an improving classical tome. He flicked the pages to see what had attracted her to it, some with dark Gothic pictures, the text closely spaced. He picked a paragraph at random and began reading— he had seen those very words before. They were his own, damn it! Nearly dropping the book, he flicked hastily to the title page. Portrait of an Adventurer by Il Giramondo. The peregrinations of a gentleman rogue who loses his soul to dissipation and finds it again in far wandering. He feverishly searched for the publisher’s name: yes, it was John Murray. The implications slammed in on him. He was a published author! And therefore he had an income! He choked back a sob, undone by the sudden reversal of Fate. Then a cooler voice intervened. To tell Cecilia that he had an income as an author would be to reveal that he must necessarily be this wastrel. How could he? Thinking furiously, he realised he must go immediately to John Murray to ensure his identity was kept secret. Yes! It was what he must do— but he knew nothing of authors and royalties. Supposing the amount was a pittance only? Standing about would solve nothing. Only action! “Oh, Mrs Kydd?” She came in, hurriedly wiping her hands on a cloth. “Mr Renzi?” “I’m devastated to find I forgot to attend to an urgent matter. I must deal with it— I pray you tell Cecilia that I called and that I will return. A day or two at the most.” “Mr Renzi!” Mrs Kydd said, shocked. “You’re not going out in all that rain again? It’s cold and—” “I must, dear lady. I’ll take my leave now, if I may.”

Stockwin, Julian (2014-11-01). Pasha: A Kydd Sea Adventure (Kydd Sea Adventures Book 15) (Kindle Locations 266-291). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

The rain continued relentlessly as the coach ground and clattered over the cobbles towards the London road at the top of the hill. Kydd hunkered down, glowering under the press of dark thoughts that crowded in. As each rose in his consciousness, he met it with a savage riposte: there was nothing he could do about it now so he must let events take their course. A logic that would undoubtedly have met with Renzi’s approval— if he had still been by his side. Renzi, a friend of times past. Those long-ago years tugged at him with their elemental simplicity, their careless vitality. Now his bosom friend was to be wed, settle down, have his being on the land, no more to wander. They would meet again, of course: he would be married to Kydd’s sister and she would keep in touch. But at this point their lives had irrevocably diverged. In a pall of depression and aching from the ride, Kydd morosely sat through the final miles into the capital, grey and bleak in rain-swept gloom. He directed the driver to his accustomed lodgings at the White Hart in Charles Street and answered the vacuous civilities of the innkeeper with monosyllables. Tomorrow he would learn his fate. Kydd hadn’t slept well. He dressed slowly, defiantly hanging on to the fact that to the world he was still Captain Kydd, commander of His Majesty’s Ship L’Aurore, and dared any to say otherwise.

Stockwin, Julian (2014-11-01). Pasha: A Kydd Sea Adventure (Kydd Sea Adventures Book 15) (Kindle Locations 291-302). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

After a few months at his father’s estate in Anglesgreen, in the North Downs of Surrey, the bustle and clatter, the crowded business of London and its teeming throngs seemed loud and alien to Captain Alan Lewrie, RN. Oh, he’d come up to the city very briefly in January for his quarterly appearance before the Councillour of The Cheque to collect his half-pay, but then had just as quickly coached back to rusticity, and further healing. This time, though, London seemed more promising, more challenging, and Lewrie was prepared for a longer stay, to lay siege, as it were, at Admiralty right through the budding spring of 1807 for as long as necessary ’til he’d gotten himself a new active commission. Pettus, his manservant, and former cabin steward aboard his last ship, the 38-gunned Fifth Rate Reliant frigate, had no such concern for the long term, though, and was sliding from one side of the front coach seat to the other to peer out the windows at all of the hubub, as eagerly as some “Country-Put” who’d spent his entire life in one wee village. Pettus did so so energetically that Lewrie had half a mind to chide him to sit still. Thankfully, their coach came at last to the corner of Duke Street and Wigmore Street, and their pre-arranged lodgings at the Madeira Club. A letter in request, one quick reply, and Lewrie and his man had been assured room for as long as he wished; it was a certitude, for Lewrie’s father, Sir Hugo St. George Willoughby, was one of the founding investors in the club, and Lewrie was considered a legacy, and at a much-reduced rate, to boot! “At last,” Lewrie said with a sigh after their long and slow trip up from Anglesgreen to Guildford, then to the city, on winter-muddied and rutted roads, a trip which had seemed twice as long as usual, with twice the usual traffic. “I’m badly in need of a jaunt to the ‘Jakes’, and a mug o’ somethin’ warm!” By calendar it might be April of 1807, but the winter had been harsh and had lingered. Even with a greatcoat on, and a wool blanket over his lap and legs, the day had started raw and showed little sign of improvement. At least it was not raining, Lewrie could conjure, though the skies were iron grey with quick-scudding low clouds. The club’s doorman scuttled down from the raised entry stoop to fold down the coach’s metal steps and open the door, doffing his hat as Lewrie tossed aside the blanket and stepped down to the kerb. “So good to see you, again, Captain Lewrie,” the flunky said. “Good t’be back, aye,” Lewrie replied. “You’ll see to my traps and all? Good. Come on, Pettus, let’s go in and get warm!” There was a new clerk behind the entry hall desk and its many letter slots and outerwear racks, who looked up from his paperwork as the doors opened, admitting a quick breath of nippy damp wind, and a gentleman new to him. “Captain Alan Lewrie,” Lewrie said, naming himself as he took off his hat and gloves, “I believe ye have rooms reserved for me and my man?” “Ehm … let me see … yes, we do, sir,” the clerk perked up after looking over his lists quickly. “On the third storey, facing the street, sir, but with a fireplace that draws very well.” “Topping!” Lewrie heartily exclaimed, clapping his gloves on the palm of his opposite hand, before Pettus helped him remove his greatcoat. The new clerk wondered whether this Captain Lewrie was Army or Navy, for there was no outward sign since he was garbed in civilian suitings; he wondered, too, if the fellow had had a long bout of fever, for the man’s black coat, figured cream waistcoat, and buff trousers seemed loose on his frame. Beyond that, the clerk beheld a gentleman who looked to be in his mid-fourties, about nine inches above five feet tall, a gentleman who wore his own hair instead of a wig, hair that was slightly curly, mid-brown, brushed back at the temples and over his ears in waves, joined with longer new-styled sideburns, and aha! As this Captain Lewrie turned to speak to his manservant, the clerk espied a wee sprig of a queue at the nape of his neck, bound in black ribbon; so he must be a Navy officer! This Lewrie seemed a merry sort, with bright grey-blue eyes, merry enough to make the clerk smile a bit broader than his usual wont bestowed upon club members—’til he spotted a faint vertical scar on the man’s left cheek. Perhaps, the clerk thought, this Captain Lewrie was not always quite so merry, and was a fighting man to be reckoned with! “We shall see your luggage sent up to your room, sir, and lay a good fire,” the clerk promised. He handed over a large key with an oval brass tab. “I’ll leave you t’that, Pettus,” Lewrie said, “and once I’ve re-discovered the ‘necessary’, I’ll be in the Common Rooms.” *   *   * There was a good fire ablaze in the Common Rooms, too, when Lewrie entered it, and he went to it to rub his cold hands before its warmth, even turn his backside to it and lift the tails of his coat. “Damned raw day,” someone comfortably ensconced in one of the leather wing-back chairs by the fire commented. “Why, good Captain Lewrie!” older Mister Giles, a man of substance in the leather goods trade, exclaimed. “Well met, sir! Up from the country at last, hah! I say, Showalter, Captain Lewrie’s back!” A younger fellow on the opposite side of the fireplace dropped his masking newspaper and rose to his feet with a smile to offer his hand. “Grand to see you, again, sir. Bless me, but do I note that you no longer have need of your walking stick? Capital!” Showalter had at long last won himself a seat in the House of Commons, a couple of years back, and was quick to inform Lewrie with some glee that he’d just been re-elected by an even greater majority on the hustings. Lewrie recalled that Showalter had spoken of being married with children long before, but still lodged at the Madeira Club when Parliament was in session, leaving wife and children back in his home borough. “It took a bit of doing, but I finally got strong enough to do without, thankee,” Lewrie informed him, looking about for a seat close to the fire. One of the club’s waiters in breeches, a livery-striped waistcoat, and white apron, came over at once, dragging another leather wing-back chair for him, and taking his order for a wee pot of very hot tea, with a dollop of rum. “Healed up and fit enough to seek a new ship, are you, sir?” Mr. Giles good-naturedly asked. “Well, that’s grand. Can’t allow a fellow such as yourself to be idle and out of the game for too long.” “My thoughts exactly, Mister Giles,” Lewrie agreed as his tea was quickly fetched to him. “What’s been acting in London in my absence? Anything good at the theatres?” “Well, I’m not all that much a patron of the stage,” Showalter told him, “not like our former member, Major Baird, haw!” he added, pulling a face. Before he had finally found a suitable wife, Major Baird had haunted Covent Garden and Drury Lane, in search of covert, upright, and oral sex from the orange-selling theatre girls. “I favor the symphony, myself, and I heard a good’un two nights ago. That Austrian fellow, Beethoven? He named it the Eroica. It plays through the month…” “Dedicated to the Corsican Ogre, Napoleon Bonaparte,” Giles grumbled, working his mouth in distaste, “damn his eyes.” “Re-dedicated to Admiral Nelson, as the programme declared when I attended,” Showalter corrected. “And rightly so.” “Amen,” Lewrie agreed, thinking that he would take it in. “And, Baird’s still a member, though he don’t come by half as much as before,” Giles supplied. “A man needs good company and a fine meal every now and then, finer than what his own household can offer, I’d expect. Get away from wife and kiddies?” “Pilkington is still with us,” Showalter told Lewrie. “Still as much a Cassandra as ever. Gloom, doom, and the ruin of trade.” “Perhaps not a true Cassandra, sir,” Giles quibbled. “Mind, she was always right in her dire predictions, quite unlike Pilkington.” “The Berlin Decrees have Pilkington nigh-wailing and wringing his hands,” Showalter said with a laugh. Mustive missed somethin’ in the papers, Lewrie thought; What the Devil are the Berlin Decrees? Should I admit my ignorance? “I recall readin’ something of ’em in the papers,” Lewrie carefully said with a dismissive shrug. “After Christmas, I think?” “Yes, after Napoleon finished off the Prussians,” Mr. Giles said, nodding in agreement. “The Ogre said he’d make economic war as well as the regular sort against us. Now he’s taken most of Europe and set up his so-called Confederation of the Rhine, he decreed that every port under his control will deny any British goods, and forbid anyone in Europe to have truck with us, cutting us off from any and all of their goods.” “Yes, and any neutral ship that’s put into any of our ports to be inspected for contraband, he’ll seize,” Showalter huffily stuck in. “The nerve of the man! If the Americans, for example, obey our Orders In Council and call in Great Britain first, they’ll be banned to land their goods in Europe. If they sail direct for the Continent, despite us, our Navy can seize them, so God only knows what the neutrals will do. Caught ’twixt the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea, what? I did hear that the Americans might just embargo all European trade altogether!” “Tosh!” Lewrie exclaimed. “Sharp-practised Yankee merchants to just give up trade? That’s inconceivable.” So that’s what it’s all about, he assured himself. “It’ll never work, you know,” Mr. Giles pooh-poohed. “There’s Portugal, there’s still the great trade with Russia, with us getting all her hides and timber, Sweden and her iron ore, there’s our goods going to the United States, and so many ports still open to us in the Mediterranean … and, our avid and able smugglers.” “And the Danes,” Showalter reminded them. “Why, the leather trade’s never been better!” Mr. Giles boasted. “Austria, the Russians, as they rebuild their armies, their orders for
 boots, shoes, and soldiers’ accoutrements have never been higher. Do mark my words, sirs … Napoleon’s much-vaunted Continental System is more-like to result in the utter economic strangulation of France!” “And, pray God, sir, all Napoleon’s allies,” Showalter gravely said with a firm affirmative nod of his head. “Wool’s high, too,” Mr. Giles ruminated, looking sage and content. “Mister Meacham … you haven’t met him yet, Lewrie, he’s new to us, from the Midlands … was in town a month ago to contract with agents for foreign buyers of his goods, and was positively exultant with the results! So much so that he contemplated opening an entire newer and larger mill, due to the great demand.” “Almost every member I’ve spoken to here with any ties to the manufacturing or export trade still seems to be doing extremely well,” Showalter contributed with a grin. “That’s not to say that it’ll last, but for now, Bonaparte’s edict is toothless. And, as Mister Giles believes, it’ll hurt the French much more than us. We’ve the whole world for our market, our colonial possessions aside, with the largest fleet of merchantmen, and the Royal Navy to protect them. And what do the French have? Blockade, laid-up ships, grass growing on the piers, and grinding poverty.” The Madeira Club had been founded by Sir Hugo St. George Willoughby, Sir Malcom Shockley, and four or five other gentlemen, most of them in trade. Sir Malcom and Lewrie’s father could have joined one of the more esteemed gentlemen’s clubs like Boodle’s, Almack’s—well, in Sir Hugo’s case, that might’ve been a stretch since he had been tainted with the tarbrush of a rogue ever since the Hell-Fire Club had been exposed—but it had been Sir Malcom’s, and the bulk of the original founders’, idea that there must be a place where sober and industrious men who’d made themselves, and made large piles of money in trade and manufacturing, could commingle, lodge comfortably when in London, dine extremely, well, and enjoy a fine wine cellar. Such men might be bags wealthier than the members of the prestigious gentlemen’s clubs, but they were in Trade, did not own great country estates, had not attended Oxford or Cambridge, and did not live on their rents and the produce of their lands. It was good odds they would be rejected if they tried to apply. Lewrie couldn’t have cared less whether they were secret Druids. The Madeira Club offered clean, comfortable rooms, good meals, and a very extensive selection of wines—they even managed to stock some of his favourite aged American corn whisky!—and he would be the last person to denigrate someone else because he was not titled or one of the great, landed Squirearchy. His own knighthood and baronetcy was a bitter joke to him, already, awarded more, he suspected, for political ends to drum up patriotism during the run-up to the re-start of the war with France in 1803. Besides, it had cost the life of his wife, Caroline, shot down on a beach near Calais, a shot meant for him, as they had fled Paris during the Peace of Amiens. Commercial sorts the bulk of the members might be, but most of them were decent company, during the rare times when Lewrie was not at sea and back in London. The only thing that irked him was the demand for proper decorum and quiet in the wee hours. He could never bring a woman up to his rooms on the sly, and riotous hoo-rawing, loud music and song, and flung rolls at meals were right out, too! The club members liked to go to bed early, sleep soundly, and rise too damned early for Lewrie’s likes, but … The tall clock in the entry hall chimed half-past five, seemingly a signal to conjure the arrival of several more members, some of them new to Lewrie, and younger than he. There was a great bustle to doff hats, cloaks, and greatcoats, then rush to the fireplace for a warm-up of hands and backsides. Tea, coffee, and brandy were called for, and swiftly delivered. Lewrie was introduced to the new ones, striving to retain all their names, and was greeted by some of the longer-timed members he’d met before. The newer members, after thawing out, drifted to the tables and seating arrangements in other parts of the Common Rooms. “Nice-enough fellows,” Mr. Giles allowed in a hushed voice to Lewrie, leaning over towards him. “But, most don’t lodge here, thank the Lord. Our new’uns are a bit too boisterous for me. The club’s changing, perhaps not for the better. Why, next thing you know, we will have women dined in!” “Ahem,” someone said in a low voice, coughing into his fist. “Captain Lewrie?” It was the manager, Hoyle. “Aye, Mister Hoyle?” Lewrie replied, swivelling about. “My apologies, sir, about your assignment of rooms. The clerk is new, and did not know of your, ehm … infirmity,” Hoyle muttered, all but wringing his hands. “I will see that you’re moved to a lower storey…” “Not a bit of it, Mister Hoyle!” Lewrie said with a laugh. “I am not the man I was when last I came, in January. I’m fit as a fiddle, and even danced the hours away at the last country ball, so the third storey’s just fine for me. No reason for my man, Pettus, to be shifting my things round.” “Really, sir?” Hoyle said, eyebrows up in surprise. “Why, that is wonderful … good news, indeed. My congratulations, sir! Do you need anything, though, just let us know.” “Thankee, Hoyle, and I shall,” Lewrie assured him. Mr. Giles levered himself up from his chair after Hoyle left. “Save my seat for me, will you, gentlemen? I will return, anon. And, does the waiter come round in my absence, I’d admire a brandy. I think it’s late enough in the day to indulge. Sun’s under the yardarm, hey, Captain Lewrie?” “Somewhere in the world, aye, Mister Giles,” Lewrie agreed. “In cold weather, he’s a permanent fixture by the hearth, is our Mister Giles,” Showalter wryly whispered as the older fellow departed. “And, none too keen on some of the newer members. Why, half of them are junior partners in their concerns, not owners. An attorney or three, fellows from the ’Change, even some serving officers. Poor Giles is sure they’ll steal his seat if he’s not careful!” “Sounds as if things might become more lively round here than in the past?” Lewrie speculated. “Only partially,” Showalter seemed to mourn, “and that only ’til bedtime for the oldsters. After that, it’s funereal, more’s the pity. At least, the mood’s brighter at mealtimes, and the victuals are still excellent!” CHAPTER TWO “Will there be anything else tonight, sir?” Pettus asked after he’d tugged Lewrie’s top-boots off, hung up his suitings, waist-coat and shirt, and handed him a thick robe. “Don’t think so, Pettus, no,” Lewrie told him. “I think that I have all that I’ll need ’til morning.” His best-dress Navy uniform was hung up on a rack in a corner, brushed and sponged for his appearance at Admiralty, the coat with the star of the Order of The Bath attached, the blue sash that went with it freshly pressed wrinkle-free, as was his neck-stock and shirt. Snowy white duck breeches awaited the morning, as did a pair of gold-tasseled Hessian boots, newly daubed and brushed. There was a carafe of water with a clean glass atop, for rinsing sleep from his mouth and brushing his teeth with tooth powder. His “housewife” kit for shaving was laid out by the wash-hand stand, and a half-pint glass bottle of whisky stood on the nightstand. The chamberpot was clean and empty, so far, and in all, he was set for the night. “Six in the morning, sir?” Pettus asked. “Aye, six, and have a good night, Pettus,” Lewrie bade him. Once alone, Lewrie poured himself some whisky and went to the chair by the fire, taking along a candelabra so he could at last read one of the London papers, abandoned in the Common Rooms after supper. The supper, well! As toothsome as his personal cook, Yeovill, prepared his meals, the club’s cooks could give him a run for his money. There had been breaded flounder, sliced turkey with red currant sauce, and prime rib of beef for the main courses, with lashings of green peas, beans, hot-house asparagus, and potatoes, both mashed and au gratin, with sweet figgy-dowdy to finish it off, then port or sherry, nuts and sweet bisquits to cap it all off. Showalter had been right; the company at-table had been most lively, witty, and amusing, more so than Lewrie could recall from his earlier stays. Nobody had broken into song, but they could have! Of course, after supper, a good part of the diners had left to return to their regular lodgings or go about the town to seek their further amusements, or pleasures, and but for a few hold-outs in the Common Rooms, the club had gone quiet once more, with most of the members who lodged off to bed at an early hour. After a brandy by the fire, Lewrie had toddled off, too. Even with the four candles and the light of the fire reflected off the brass back plate, reading the paper was hard going. He gave it up and went to bed, doffing his robe and quickly sliding under the thick covers, snuffing all but one candle to savour his whisky. Lewrie did, before pulling up the blankets and coverlet, raise his right leg and look once more at his thigh, grimacing again at the ragged, round, and dis-coloured puckered scar from a lucky long-range shot by a Spanish sailor, made even worse by the rough and un-gentle ministrations of his Ship’s Surgeon, Mr. Mainwaring, as he’d probed deep for the bullet, the patches of cotton duck from his breeches, his silk shirt-tails, and his muslin underdrawers with long pincers gouging remorselessly for the very last thread. That wound was not the only one he’d suffered in his twenty-seven years in the Navy, but by God, it had been the most painful, a shrieking agony that seemed to last as long as the pangs of Hell! Even the thought of it made him shiver. He’d come to from a fever and laudanum-laced stupor to find himself in constant, throbbing pain, bound up in baby swaddles,
 fouling himself, and helpless, unable to crawl out of his hanging bed-cot and make it to his quarter-gallery, for an embarrassing fortnight. When he did manage to move without the pain immobilising him, it had taken Pettus and his cabin-servant, Jessop, to support him for a fortnight more. At least I could wipe mine own arse! he thought. When he could put slop trousers or breeches on, and attend to ship’s business once more, there had first been a crutch to aid him, with a watchful Pettus or Jessop at his elbow, still. Graduating to a walking stick had felt like marvellous progress, but … he had had need of it from their break in passage at St. Helena all the way to England, through de-commissioning Reliant, reporting to Admiralty, and going home to Anglesgreen, and his father’s house. At least Sir Hugo had patterned his house after a rambling Hindoo bungalow so there were no stairs to manage! He’d gone on half-pay a cripple, a weak-legged shambler with a dubious future. Even mounting or dis-mounting a horse, or taking a morning ride at only a walk, not a trot, was a fearsome chore, and could cause a dull and deep ache! For a time, Lewrie had dreaded that not only would he never be called to service again, there was a good chance that he would be doomed to be only half a full man! Thank God, again, for Will Cony, he grimly thought. *   *   * Over the years since first settling in Anglesgreen near his in-laws in 1789 to live upon a rented farm, whenever Lewrie had returned, whether from London or the sea, his first stop had always been the Old Ploughman public house. In the early days, when old Mr. Beakman had owned it, the Old Ploughman looked and felt smoky, grimy, and ancient, as it indeed was, the interior dim and low-ceilinged, the plastered walls and overhead beams dark with hundreds of years of hearth smoke. Its customers were mostly the common folk of the village, with small farmers, cottagers, and day labourers thrown in. The finer Red Swan Inn, a larger and airier red brick building which sat at the far Western end of the long, grassy-green common which ran along the narrow river that bisected Anglesgreen, had always been the best establishment but it had not been for Lewrie. The richer Squirearchy gathered there, including Sir Romney Embleton, the largest landowner around and magistrate, and his spiteful son Harry, who had “had his cap set” for Caroline Chiswick, who had married Lewrie instead, just before taking on his first, command of little HMS Alacrity in 1786. They had returned three years later with one child born and another on the way, making Harry grind his teeth anew. No, Lewrie would never be welcome in the Red Swan, even now that Harry had managed to find a woman who would put up with him and had a family of his own! A few years back, Lewrie’s long-time manservant, cabin-steward, and Cox’n, Will Cony, had come back to Anglesgreen with carefully saved prize money, with a foot shot off to end his own Navy service, and he and his wife, Maggie, had bought the Old Ploughman from Beakman, and had turned it into a much cleaner, brighter tavern, where Lewrie would always be welcome. And such was the case when his coach rattled to a stop on the gravelled turn-out, bearing Lewrie, Pettus, Jessop, and Yeovill, with a second dray waggon following with Liam Desmond and Patrick Furfy aboard, which bore all his cabin furnishings and personal goods. “Captain Lewrie, sir!” a fit and good-looking young fellow in a publican’s blue apron called out once he had come out to see what the noise was about. The lad looked like a younger version of Will Cony, but Lewrie couldn’t recall his name, right off. There were three boys born to the Conys, and Lewrie’s sons had played with them, no matter what his in-laws and Uncle Phineas Chiswick thought of it. “Little Will, sir!” the lad prompted, beaming fit to bust. “Good Lord, the spittin’ image of your dad at his age!” Lewrie exclaimed as he carefully levered himself off the bench seat into the doorway of the coach. “Where do the years go? ‘Little’, my eye!” “Father! Captain Lewrie’s come home!” Little Will shouted over his shoulder towards the half-opened doors. “Come quick!” Lewrie put his good left leg on the first of the folding metal coach steps, clung to the door to place his sore right one on it, then slowly descended, wincing when he put weight upon his bad leg. Once on the ground, his stout walking stick eased the pressure. Just at that moment, Will Cony came out, began to smile a welcome, but froze, and got a worried look oh his face. “Dear God, sir, but what’ve the bastard Frogs done t’ya!” Will gasped, coming close as if to give him a shoulder to lean on. “Let’s git ya in outta the cold, and sit ya down with a mug o’ warm ale.” “Wasn’t the Frogs, Will, but the Dons, this time,” Lewrie said. “And aye, a good chair and a pint of your best’d be more than welcome. Ale for all. Summon the coachee and the waggon driver, Pettus, and I expect they’re in need, too.” Christ, we could make a passable pair o’ drummers! Lewrie imagined as they went inside. Will Cony’s artificial “board foot” boot shuffled and thumped with each step, right alongside the matching tap of Lewrie’s cane almost made a rubato rhythm! He shed his hat and greatcoat and took ease in a sturdy wooden chair at a table near one of the fireplaces, letting out a wee sigh of relief from pain. A moment later, though, and Lewrie was struggling to rise as Maggie Cony and the other two Cony sons came bustling out from the kitchens. “La, don’t ye be gettin’ up, Cap’m Lewrie!” Maggie cried. “Lord, but it’s good t’see ye back, hurt or no. Ye remember Thomas and Anthony, little Tony? Well, none of ’em so little now. Ye’ll be suppin’ with us here?” “I sent word ahead to my father’s place that we’d be arriving, so I expect his house staff’s layin’ on something, but thankee for the offer, Maggie,” Lewrie explained. “I wouldn’t want them to put themselves out for nothing. Now I’m ashore on half-pay, you’ll be seein’ more than enough o’ me, for mid-day dinners, and t’read the papers.” “A pint o’ the fall ale, sir,” the fetching brunette waitress Lewrie recalled from three years before said, bustling to the table with a tray of filled mugs. “An’ may I be so bold as t’welcome ye back, sir,” she added, with a smile and a brief curtsy. “Thankee, uh…” Lewrie replied, stuck for another name. “Why, ye recall Abigail, Cap’m,” Will Cony said, laughing out loud. “She started with us a bit afore ya got Reliant and went away. Don’t know what we’d do without ’er.” “Ye could pay me more, am I that good, Mister Cony,” Abigail teased before turning away to see to the others at the table. “So, ya paid her off, at last, sir,” Will Cony said, “an’ what o’ th’ local lads I rounded up for ya?” Lewrie could reassure him that of the twenty volunteers that Will had recruited from Anglesgreen and the farms around, all but two of them were alive and well, though by now surely parcelled out to other ships in need of crew whilst Reliant went into the graving docks to be substantially rebuilt. It was the way of the Navy, as Will Cony ruefully knew. “Hated t’give ’em up,” Lewrie admitted. “The local lads might have come aboard as raw Landsmen, but they made fine topmen and Ordinary Seamen by the end. All of ’em a parcel better than the dregs from the County Quotas. Even worse than what the ’Press dragged in for us, in the old days, Will. My word, that is a damned fine ale, as good as you’ve ever brewed!” Lewrie told him, after a first, deep taste. “Aye, we’ve had a couple o’ good years,” Cony modestly boasted, “fine barley, fine rye, and splendid hops, and folk hereabout tell me even the Red Swan can’t match us. But…” he went on, sighing, “nowadays, folk’re callin’ for city-brewed ale, beers, porters, an’ stouts, and there’s chapmen in all the time, floggin’ waggonloads o’ kegs, an’ tryin’ t’sign me up t’one brand, exclusive. Puttin’ th’ squeeze on us somethin’ fierce. Fine for a big town with lots o’ taverns, but here?” “I’d drink yer ale th’ whole day long, Mister Cony, an’ even say no t’Guinness!” Patrick Furfy hooted from his table. Lewrie had no time to tell Cony of his adventures, nor how he had been wounded, promising that he would be back in another day, once he’d gotten settled at his father’s estate. “It may be I’ll become a permanent fixture,” Lewrie said with a grimace, tapping his right thigh. “The Navy may not have me anymore.” “Well, it ain’t like the Dons shot it off, sir!” Cony exclaimed. “Or, yer ‘saw-bones’ shortened ya. A few months in the country’ll do wonders for ya, we’ll see t’that. Maggie’s cookin’ll put some meat on yer bones, an’ we’ll have ya dancin’ by spring. Look at me, sir, with my foot shot off. I walked meself t’rights, an’ now I’m as spry as a pup, an’ wot I could do, you can do, s’truth. I’m yer man fer that!” “I may take you up on that, Will,” Lewrie promised, though not putting too much hope in the offer. “As for now, though, we’d better be gettin’ on to my father’s place before dark. What’s the reckoning?” he said, reaching for his coin purse, and the new-fangled paper currency. “You settle in, and come on back down, when yer up to it, Cap’m Lewrie, and we’ll see to ya,” Cony offered again. CHAPTER THREE The Old Ploughman just might be the only place in Anglesgreen where Lewrie felt true comfort. He certainly did not feel at ease at his father’s house. Of only one storey or not, Sir Hugo St. George Willoughby had built Dun Roman to ramble all over the gently sloped hilltop, incorporating the ancient ruin of a stone watchtower into it, with a Hindoo-style covered gallery across the front of the central section, English weather be-damned, a gravelled roundabout drive in front of that, with a Mediterranean-styled fountain, replete with three very lasciviously carved water-bearing nymphs in the centre, all surrounded
 by terra cotta planters and flowering shrubs, in season. Just how much loot did the old fart fetch back from India? he was forced to wonder; And where did he develop such good taste? And then he just had t’name it so lamely! “Done Roaming”, which was the real meaning upon which the pun of Dun Roman was based, was more fitting on a weekender tradesman’s cottage in Islington, for God’s sake! Oh, it had been grand when Lewrie had first seen it, ages ago, and once inside, it had gotten made over over the years into a marvel. Spacious entry foyer, first salon to the right, library-office-study to the left; formal dining room aft of that, smaller en famille breakfasting room off that, then the entertaining hall astern of all those, big enough for a game of tennis, and the rare ball. There were two wings, with four bed-chambers in each, with his father’s the largest. One could use a guide to find one’s way about, making Lewrie feel as if he was but temporarily residing at a sumptuous hotel! The house staff was new to him, too, as much as he and his entourage was to them, so everyone felt wary and on guard, from the cool and dignified butler, Mayo, his wife the housekeeper, the footmen and maids, maids of all work, the stout old cook, Mrs. Furlough, who looked on Yeovill as a threat to her job security, right down to the coachman and grooms and the wee young scullery maid! Lewrie had a set of rooms dedicated as his, with some of his old settee furniture, writing desk, and books and bookcases from the time that he and his late wife, Caroline, had rented a farm and had run up a pleasant house when they’d come back to Anglesgreen from the Bahamas in 1789 … painfully, Sir Hugo had hung Caroline’s portrait in there, the one done in ’86 when she’d been a new and happy bride. At least he had Pettus as someone familiar to do for him, and Jessop, when he wasn’t hanging round the barns and stables, gawking and full of a thousand questions, since he’d never been on a working farm before, having been dredged up on the streets of Portsmouth. As for Desmond and Furfy, they’d been to Anglesgreen before, and after a few days of loafing, had pitched in with the farm work, what little there was with winter coming on, assisting the estate manager and the grooms, exercising the saddle horses and teaching Jessop to ride. Chalky, Lewrie’s mostly-white cat, and Bisquit, the former ship’s dog, had a myriad of rooms, wardrobes, cabinets, and corners to explore in the house, though the youngest footman had to be assigned to keep an eye on the dog so the polished wood floors and expensive carpets didn’t get soiled. Poor Bisquit. As Reliant was de-commissioned, draughts of sailors were paid off and re-assigned to other ships, leaving Bisquit without his long-time playmates and those who would sneak him treats. No one could think what to do with him. The Midshipmens’ mess which had snuck him aboard as their pet in the beginning certainly could not take him to their new ships, and neither could the Commission Officers; any new captain of theirs might have Bisquit thrown ashore to fend for himself! Even the Standing Officers who remained with the ship ’til she was at last scrapped could not keep him; their wives and children would be living aboard with them ’til Reliant was out of the yards and re-commissioned and would eventually have to place the dog’s fate in the hands of the frigate’s new captain. At least Lewrie had a farm, or, technically, he had access to his father’s estate, where Bisquit could thrive, and, should Lewrie ever gain a new ship and an active commission, the dog might remain, so he had decided to fetch Bisquit along, with a stout leather leash tied to his collar should Bisquit get too distracted and lope off on the journey to get hopelessly lost.

Lambdin, Dewey (2014-02-03T22:58:59). The King's Marauder: An Alan Lewrie Naval Adventure (Alan Lewrie Naval Adventures Book 20) (Kindle Locations 96-387). St. Martin's Press. Kindle Edition. 

The red-hot iron sphere passed so close to Jack’s ear that its approach sounded like canvas ripping apart in a full gale. Blood has a smell, he remembered, tangy and sharp like rust. His tongue involuntarily flicked out to taste his lip. And it tastes like iron, too, he thought, as he sucked in his own salty sweat with his next desperate breath. It occurred to him that after so many battles, this was his first taste of it. It was the kind of day to expect a lot of blood—enough to rob you of your footing on the slanting deck. It was a day when brave men had to will their bodies forward, and when cowards sought shelter. Because at this point in the battle you knew which you were—a courageous fool or a weaker man who might live another day and even someday redeem himself. Steel clashed and sang around him in a thick electric cloud of desperate men, their blades clanging, echoing and thudding into flesh everywhere. Groans escaped unwanted but uncontrollable from brave men whose hands were dealt unluckily. Another roar from forward and alee told him he was directly in the line of fire this time. He stiffened to take whatever came and thought of his honor. But the downward blow of a heavy cutlass from in front released an automatic upward spring of his arm and he caught the blow against his own blade. The heel of his boot slipped and he went down. As he did, he looked up and saw an eighteen pound ball shear away the head and shoulders of the man behind him. Jack knew that if Providence had not struck him to the deck he would be dead. He knew it was the kind of day when what you thought made no difference: you merely reacted and watched Fate reveal itself. If God was watching from above that day, maybe through the eyes of the curious pelican circling above the mastheads of the two little ships, and if smoke and the tangle of fallen spars, best-laid manila and thick canvas were not blocking the view of the violent struggle on the merged decks below, He might have been in awe Himself at the courage of these men, who even in their most relaxed state could not see beyond The Horizon of Time and Purpose as He could, because today was the kind of day when only God could know the outcome of this battle, or of its outsized significance for a new navy and a new nation. CHAPTER ONE In 1787 Thomas Gallagher rose from his family’s happy table on a sunny day to resume work with his five sons. He wore the lingering smile of a funny story he had recounted for his family. But as he turned to don his hat he faltered. Surprise crossed his sun-lined face, followed by disbelief. His great winged eyebrows squeezed together in pain and he grabbed the tablecloth and fell, pulling the detritus of their meal over himself. For an unbelieving moment the family sat stunned, until his sons lifted him up onto the table. His wife covered her quivering mouth with her hands and the rose color drained from her cheeks. “Are you all right, Thomas?” his wife implored. The old man shook his head. They looked at one another with fear. His barrel chest heaved and struggled for air. “I feel like a horse fell on me,” he said in sputtered breaths. He looked away from his wife for a moment to gather strength to speak again, and then addressed his sons. “I have something to say to you now, in case I cannot later.” Their shocked faces reflected the realization he was dying, and they leaned closer to hear him. “Our blood is in this land,” he hissed through pain. “It is all we have left as Irishmen. You know the laws made my own father divide the Gallagher land among his sons equally.” He groaned and then continued, wincing with pain. “The farm must pass in equal parts to each of you. The demon English weaken us by generations.” In the midst of pain and weakness they saw his familiar defiance. He rested a moment and drew another breath. “But you must promise me ... .” He faltered, his eyes rolling upward, and his wife tightened her grip on his hand. “Promise me ... you will never sell your portions ... no matter how small they are.” One of his daughters gave a loud wail while the other three moaned softly. His wife leaned forward, took his hand and pressed it against her mouth, trying to contain her grief. “Will you promise me this?” he asked again. Then he seemed to gain a bit of strength. He raised onto an elbow and glared sternly and successively into the eyes of each of his sons. Finally he turned to his wife Gretta—and out of view of his sons—gave her a painful smile. She straightened up and smiled back through her tears. A coughing spasm pulled him back into pain and his head dropped. His eyelids narrowed and he seemed to stare through the ceiling, until suddenly they widened again in surprise and his breathing stopped. Thorne, eighteen, turned away and looked out the window, to hide his feelings. He feared grief might rise up and spill out of him against his will. He did not want that to happen in front of anyone else, so he pressed the palms of his hands to his big forehead as if to contain his feelings. A surge of grief rushed up from his gut. He tried moving but his legs felt like sticks. It surprised him to find he could not even bend his knees. Da’s death has shaken me, he realized, but I’ll contain it, at least for now. Tears threatened at the corners of his eyes and he closed his fists so tightly they began to cramp. Later, he thought, not now. He had loved and respected his father beyond any man and now he needed time to make sense of the loss. His sisters crowded closer, jostling him and he stumbled away from the table. They embraced their dead father and tried to comfort their mother. As their mourning grew louder it increased by degrees from sudden gulps like a drowning person gasping for air, to nasal whining exhalations, each feeding upon the other until it became an unbroken chorus of pitiful wailing, sobs and plaintive calls to the dead man, God and the saints. Taking advantage of the start his sisters had afforded him toward the door, he lurched out of the tiny kitchen as if drunk and the wailing in his ears diminished. His sister Susan came outside and as they looked at each other, she managed to keep her round, freckled face blank and pious for a moment before it turned scarlet. She began crying again and ran into the shed where she rummaged for several minutes. Thorne heard dull thuds, sharp bangs and whimpered curses. Finally she emerged with a laundry tub, her eyes streaming with tears, and marched back to the kitchen. The women shooed the men into the living room and then tacked a tablecloth across the doorway to the kitchen, filled the tub with water, and gathered sponges and soap. Gently they removed the old man’s clothes—the same work clothing he had worn for so many years. It was something they associated so closely with him that as they handled it their sobs increased again. The widow willed her grief aside and paved it over with hard purposefulness. She snapped, “There’ll be no keening yet. And I expect you all to scrape together your copper for a proper one. We’ll hire four—no less—and each with a proper voice.” Susan argued, “Ma, it’s against the dogma, says Father Paul.” “And what would a half-German priest know of Irish ways? They keened your father’s father at his wake, and my parents, too. We’ll keep silent until the wake. Do you hear me? Your father’s soul needs time to leave his body.” The young women seemed puzzled by this, prompting her to continue, “Do you not know about the devils’ dogs that lie in wait for passing souls? We mustn’t wake them with wailing until his soul has passed.” Thorne joined his brothers in the living room. Another sister, Moira, entered brusquely and marched her stout frame past the silent group into the brothers’ common bedroom. They heard drawers slam as she searched for something. Thorne’s next younger brother Michael, indignant at his sister rummaging through his personal belongings, rose to stop her. “What do you think you’re doing in there?” he demanded. His brother Padraig’s gentle hand on his wrist restrained him. “Let her go, Michael.” Michael dropped his challenging stare, which often was more intimidating than he intended owing to the broken nose and puffy ears he had gotten fighting in town for money. He slumped back in his chair and resumed a morose study of the living room floor. He did not look up again when Moira came out of his room carrying a white surplice that had been worn by successive brothers as altar boys. The Gallaghers were grateful for what they had, and they did not think much about what they lacked. But one thing they lacked was space. Therefore, when the sisters and widow finished washing the body and dressing it in the white linen surplice they joined the boys in the living room. Brigid framed the doorway with her hands on her hips and seemed to find refuge from grief in her bossiness. “It’s been decided, then. He’ll be laid out in the parlor on the piano.” The boys looked at the tiny parlor next to the living room. “It’s the only suitable surface in the house, it is, and that’s that. What’s more, each of you will stand watch over the body in accordance with the traditions.” Her voice broke, “Da’ won’t be alone until he’s buried, which’ll be no sooner than three days from now.” She scooped up her apron, covered her face, and sobbed. Their mother spoke. “The girls and I will spend our time preparing the house for the wake, cleaning and baking.” The mention of baking cheered the boys and an energized rumble spread through them, and drove away some of their lassitude and glumness. Before long they began to argue over who would take each watch over the body and how they would re-distribute their chores. The various long and winding roads from nearby Kinsale, Youghal and even as far away as Glengarriff brought sisters, cousins, an aged uncle, two maiden aunts, grand-nephews
 and nieces, and several of the old man’s friends. The family only dimly recognized a couple of these friends, and suspected the old man had died owing them money. Many arrived out of sorts, exhausted and ill-tempered from the shameless state of Cork County roads, or from the curious relentless wind that seemed to blow always from the direction of their destination regardless of where they started. Various tales of travail emerged as the first of them appeared. Mr. Thynne complained, “Not wanting to be late, I took the shortcut over the old cairn walls a mile back, where I fell and barked me shin and skinned me knee somethin’ terrible. But I’m here and that’s what matters, to be sure.” Odela, one of the ancient widowed aunts, said, “I’m certainly sorry for your troubles, Mr. Thynne, but I doubt a gigantic vicious dog has mauled you to within an inch of your life, as it has myself on my way here. I would not have been spared except for my black scapular of the Seven Dolors of Mary.” She reached down into her ample wrinkled bosom, fished around alarmingly, retrieved a small black rectangle of wool she wore on strings around her neck, and thrust it toward their faces as if its presence was all the proof they needed of a miracle. A small tear in the hem of her skirt and secret signals from her daughter-in-law—who made arch facial expressions behind her—suggested not a little exaggeration on the aunt’s part, and most likely the dog in question was only Mrs. Harris’ adolescent Wheaten Terrier. When the guests were satisfied that the family had heard enough of their own woe to understand the sacrifices they had made to get there, they began offering sympathetic words to the widow. Murmurs of condolence and remembrances of old Mr. Gallagher began to fill the house. The daughters brought out a bounty of food and drink and laid it on the very table—now moved from the kitchen—at which the old man died. The guests knew they should restrain from eating and drinking until after the formalities, but a few, particularly the young and unruly ones, were already fisting sweets. They had laid out the deceased himself quite grandly too, in a gray suit and crimson tie on the piano, wearing new shoes borrowed from a sympathetic shopkeeper in Cobh with the widow’s assurance she would tell no one where she got them, thus keeping them safe for sale to a live paying customer. Just to be sure, the storekeeper kept the widow within earshot as she circulated in her crowded living room and dogged her every step, except for an occasional furtive dash he made to the table to pinch a scone or other discrete small tidbit or wee drop for his glass. Now the children, who were trussed up in ill-fitting Sunday clothes and bursting with mischief from the long trip, had a surge of sugar flowing through them. They dared to poke and prod the body and giggled at one another for their boldness. Some were curious but too frightened to touch a dead person, even through its clothing. One child grabbed the hand of another and made her touch the dead man’s face. The little girl screamed, and the next cry was from the perpetrator, slapped by his mother. The mingling, greeting and sympathetic expressions continued until a knock at the door preceded the entrance of three narrow, somber men in hats and a round woman in a black dress with bright scarlet trim—the long-awaited professional keeners. Conversation ceased as each guest took the measure of these folk from faraway Waterford. Their clothes were finer than almost everyone else’s and they seemed to hold themselves quite comfortably, especially since they were strangers to everyone and never in this house before. They knew instinctively who was the widow, who was a son or daughter, who were merely acquaintances of the dear poor deceased, and even the layout of the house—as if they had been in a hundred like it before. “Our deepest and most sympathetic condolences, Madame,” said the woman to Mrs. Gallagher with a smile. Mrs. Gallagher could not deny it was a smile, but like small beer, she found it wanting in spirit. “And such an elaborate feast of food and drink you have made! I have never seen grander.” The keeners looked hungrily at the table covered with delicacies. “It is truly heaven-sent, to be sure, with us traveling so far and never a chance of stopping to eat or drink.” She paused to let the magnitude of their sacrifice sink in. Mrs. Gallagher said nothing, wishing them to begin the keening as soon as possible. “Of course, Madame, the souls of the dead are more important than our own corporal needs. We will begin straightaway, if you please.” The keeners arranged themselves around the body with the three men standing at its head and on both sides and the woman at its feet. She brought candles from her purse and placed them at the feet of the corpse. And then she respectfully draped the most beautiful rosary any of them had ever seen over the dead man’s hands, which lay crossed atop his chest. In a soft voice she asked, “Before beginning, is there anyone among us who would like to remark upon the deceased? A fond remembrance or humorous story, perhaps.” After a moment William Gallagher—the dead man’s brother who looked so much like the deceased that the widow wept anew when she looked at him—spoke up. “All right then, I guess I could say a word. One day Thomas and me, we were tending our goats by a creek near Rostellen, so we were. It was a mortal hot day, you see. So bad the animals just laid down. The dog runs into the creek and Thomas says to me, let’s go swimming now, William, what do ya’ say? So we did, and the rascal goats revived themselves and made off with every stitch of our clothes.” This evoked polite laughter, the first heard in the house since the old man’s death. “What happened then, William?” asked Mr. Thynne. “Well, it was getting dark, you see, and the quickest way home was through the village. So Thomas says to me ‘There’s not too many in Rostellen who know us. Let’s wait until it’s really dark, and we’ll go home that way’, which is what we did. But Mary Brennan was out late with her lanthorn and caught herself a glimpse of our pale backsides. She let out a scream that would wake the dead.” He paused, looked down at the body, and made the sign of the cross before continuing. “So we ran down the middle of the street as fast as we could. There was nowhere else to run, you see. She had a powerful voice, you know, and we were desperate to get away before she recognized us. They must have thought we were criminals, you know, because they all ran out of their houses and finally pinned us against a wall with their lanthorns lighting us up. Lighting us up in places me own mother hasn’t seen in years.” There was louder laughter. “Then one of the pious ladies of Rostellen says their women aren’t safe with hooligans like us around, and the constable holds his lanthorn up close to our privates and says to her—he says—‘Not to worry, ma’am, they both appear to be unarmed’—It was a very cold night, you see.” The group erupted in raucous laughter, bringing a new kind of tear to many of their eyes. Several more accounts of the deceased followed from loved ones, until the widow ended with a touching story of her own. “Thomas loved this land, you know. It was a blessing he died on it because it was his own. When we first married I would wash his clothes and find his pockets filled with dirt. For a long time I thought it just naturally got there in the course of his work. Then I asked him one day and he told me he loved his land so much that he wanted to take a bit back with him every day.” She dabbed at her eyes with her handkerchief. “He couldn’t bear to part with it, you see.” At the end of this she glared meaningfully at each son in turn, lingering on Thorne with such an accusatory look that the discomfort in the room was palpable. Thorne wondered how even in her grief she had the power to read his mind. The keener at the corpse’s head suddenly gave a long piercing screech like a seagull, as strangely beautiful as it was unnerving. Afterward, his partner at the corpse’s feet began reciting a remarkably accurate genealogy of the Gallagher family, to the amazement of the Gallaghers themselves. Then the keener on the left-hand read a poem in Irish. At the end of each line, he gave a lingering musical wail and each of the keeners imitated it in turn, going around the body. Next, the right-hand keener said some words lamenting the necessity of death, and then, well prepared, he recited a list of virtues, interests and accomplishments during Mr. Gallagher’s sixty-one years of life. The lyrical, entrancing recitations and lamentations continued to circle the body until at first only a few, then almost all of the mourners joined in this strange and comforting ritual, which continued for half an hour. Finally the keeners bowed their heads and asked the mourners to join them in the Holy Rosary. After their Rosary the group was hushed and their sad emotions seemed spent. Thorne helped his mother to her feet and this was the signal for eating and drinking to commence in earnest. Always a considerate man in life, Mr. Gallagher’s death had afforded them all the convenience of occurring on a Wednesday morning, and this being a Friday evening, more people were able to join in the ritual than would have otherwise. The wake itself—which began tentatively enough what with so many people making new acquaintances or renewing old ones—now took on more life, so to speak. It began to resemble a large animal waking from long winter sleep, stretching, growling louder, expanding, and becoming more rambunctious with each breath. In this case however, it was not wilderness air that filled the lungs of the beast, but gallons of whiskey and beer filling a large collective stomach. The piano was sadly unavailable when the singing started,
 so they made do with a cappella renditions of well-known ballads, some in the Irish itself. They agreed this would have pleased the deceased, blessed as he had been with a beautiful voice but no affinity for musical instruments. In fact the guests learned that Mrs. Gallagher could not play the piano either, nor any of her sons or daughters. The piano was merely the proud neglected flagship of her meager dowry, by which her husband now profited for the first and last time. Mr. Breen arrived with his fiddle and Mr. Murrah with his skin and bones, and the dancing began. As they plied their instruments the reed-thin Breen looked incongruous next to Murrah, a powerful bull of a man. The joyous squeal of strings and thumping percussion seized the dancers and the floor of the cottage shook in time with the music. Half-full glasses of poteen—left so trustingly on tables, chairs, and next to the deceased—began to dance by themselves. A near-full glass made its way to the end of the piano and then over the edge, falling onto Thorne’s knee as he sat watching the dancers and brooding on how to tell the family about his decision. He sprang to his feet in a failed effort to save the falling glass, and the sudden movement changed his mood. He reached out for his sister Moira and they began to dance. Thorne caught his mother’s eye and she smiled, her first since his father’s death. The wake continued apace long into the night and ended only a few hours before dawn when the collective beast finally yawned and fell harmlessly asleep again. The new light of morning pierced the living room windows and stabbed through the eyelids of prone men scattered on the floor. They lay in various positions, some most improbable, and for the most part still in their best clothes. A few of them heard bacon frying in the kitchen and smelled its smoky aroma, causing them to pry open at least one eyelid and stretch where they lay. The keeners—who were still among them—enjoyed their breakfasts, too. Then there was an argument between Mrs. Gallagher and the keeners about payment. When the woman keener had eaten her fill of eggs, bacon and biscuits she said offhandedly, “Naturally we expect to continue with our work during the procession, the prayers over the grave, and up until the burial.” She dabbed her ample jowls with a linen napkin. “If you please, ma’am,” Mrs. Gallagher replied, “I wish you to be unnoticed once Father Paul arrives because he is not a great friend to the practice, as you might guess. And of course I expect you’ll reduce your fee accordingly, not needing your services further.” Mr. Bingham, one of the other keeners, protested. “In Waterford and the better bred parts of the country, Madame, people do not question the extent of our work.” His thick torso was still, but his short arms gesticulated angrily. “Just what do you mean by better bred, Mr. Bingham?” asked the eldest daughter Brigid. “We are every bit as well-bred as people in Waterford. And if you don’t like that, I see your high horse is waiting for you just outside our door.” Her fists clenched at the end of her long arms and her eyes widened as she moved closer to the pinched face of Mr. Bingham. The brouhaha caught the attention of some of the brothers and they stepped closer to see what was happening. Mr. Bingham, sensing the looming presence of the Gallagher men, was unaware that his voice had risen to an unmanly pitch, but realizing further protest might dampen future demand for their services in this new and potentially lucrative part of the county, took a step backward. “I certainly do not wish to cause a scene, Madame, especially at a time like this. Please forgive me.” His female colleague, who many suspected was the real captain of their enterprise, threw him a sharp sideways movement of her head, which he read as a signal to mollify the family further. “Of course we will not expect quite the normal fee.” He glanced at his female partner again, who gestured for him to continue. “Furthermore, we agree to accompany you to the church this morning and remain sotto voce, as they say.” He ended with a magnanimous bow and flourish of his hand, knowing they could use the opportunity to distribute their advertising circulars to parishioners. After breakfast when the remaining guests were as clean as the limited washing facilities could afford, everyone assumed a serious mood again while they waited for the priest and the coffin maker. When they arrived the brothers placed the deceased gently in a plain coffin that smelled of fresh-cut wood. The shopkeeper from Cobh retrieved his precious shoes from the corpse, and they closed the lid. From time immemorial there was an unspoken agreement between parish priests and parishioners to turn a blind eye to keening. But officially, the Church was unambiguous in Her opposition to it, seeing it as an unholy custom from pre-Christian Irish paganism, and against which She had issued countless edicts, synod proclamations, dogmatic interpretations, admonishments from parish pulpits, personal imprecations—even the occasional excommunication by overly zealous clergy. Nevertheless, the practice had proved impossible to eradicate for centuries. Although Father Paul indeed may have been half-German, he was certainly no fool. He knew the look of keeners well, but the pale young priest, who masked his dogmatic zeal with polished graciousness, said nothing. Pallbearers lifted the coffin onto their shoulders with a grunt, carried it out into the brilliant sunshine, and placed it on a wagon. The church in Cobh was a good two miles from the farm—a long walk for those suffering from the lingering effects of drink. On the other hand it was sobering exercise. The hay wagon creaked and rattled in the center of the silent procession as its wheels followed grooves made by countless other wagons. The adult mourners kept to the short grass on either side, while the children capered on turf between the ruts. They walked in silence except for an occasional whinny from the borrowed horses and the squeak and rattle of the wagon as it lumbered toward the main road to Cobh. At the church they laid Mr. Gallagher in a grave near relatives who had preceded him. Father Paul read over him and ended the service with, “Vade in pace.” The Gallaghers remained at the grave for a while lamenting the sad event—the close of another chapter in their family history of births, marriages, illnesses and deaths. All except Thorne were convinced that the consequences of this death would determine the course of their future, and the future of their offspring. Thorne knew there was a time to accept things as they came, and a time to use his will to make a change for the better. He felt the pendulum of destiny pause at its apogee, ready to begin its long arc back in the opposite direction. He also felt entirely alone in this thinking and prayed to God that he was right. CHAPTER TWO Hu-wump ... Hu-wump. The sudden gut-shaking noise—like heavy surf against the bottom of the cliff—came through fluttering curtains on the late morning wind carrying with it the familiar smell of countless miles of pristine ocean. Thorne Gallagher arose from a solitary lunch and stepped out of his tiny kitchen and down crooked steps to the gravel beside his whitewashed cottage to see about the strange noise. The sky above the Celtic Sea, scrubbed clean by northwest breezes, revealed no clouds or thunder. Whitecaps scudded over the scalloped surface like ghostly ponies. He shaded his eyes with his big hand and searched the horizon. He heard no more noise nor saw anything that could have caused it. His eyes lingered on the dancing sea below. It reminded him of an adolescent rejoicing in newly discovered strength—reckless and indifferent. And uncaring, it occurred to him as he tensed his dark eyes and wide mouth, like the British government. He stepped nearer to the edge and saw a warship moving south on a brisk quartering wind close inshore with her three masts surrounded in clouds of canvas. Its beauty and majesty mesmerized him. Those British seamen probably own no land as I do, he thought, but their power is absolute even in faraway ports of call. I hate them but I wish I were with them now, leaving all this toil behind. Then he realized his hypocrisy. On one hand he admired their navy and fantasized about being a part of it. On the other, he distrusted their government for what it had done to his family and so many others in Ireland. Another ship moved out from shore and steered along the coast, setting more sails as quickly as its crew could manage, trying to run from the advancing warship. He watched as the English ship swooped down with the wind toward the other vessel. Red flashes spat from the warship and the air around him vibrated with the guns’ report—and then again. Must be a smuggler they’re after, he reflected, bringing goods from France. Goods they have no scruples about buying for themselves on Irish soil. He had seen this drama played out before. But this time the smuggler turned back toward its pursuer, ran out two small cannon, and fired back. A hole appeared in one of the frigate’s sails and another shot struck the warship’s side and bounced into the ocean. Now the frigate’s guns fired mercilessly, decimating the smaller vessel. Smoke rose first from the heavy British gunfire, and then from inside the smaller ship. Thorne smelled the acrid gun smoke, burning tar and wood as it drifted up the cliff on the wind. Some of the smugglers lowered boats, desperately trying to flee. Others jumped overboard and swam for the beach. He was amazed. Although they clearly could not have escaped, he wondered why they chose to fight this time. Maybe they think they’re dead men anyway, or that their families won’t survive with them in prison. Maybe they have simply had enough. The drama ended as boats from
 the frigate pulled drenched survivors from the water and handed them up the side to armed marines in red coats. Thorne turned away and resumed his work. He was glad his brothers had not come today to help with his barn because he still wanted to grieve alone. Nor did he want to tell them he had decided to sell his land. Da’ died only days ago, he thought, and in my heart I refuse his dying wish. He dreaded their reaction, but his main concern was his mother. She had sunk further into unhappiness and although her children tried to console her she seemed to have given up on herself. If not for the pride she took in keeping her household, they feared she would take to her bed and stay there. So instead of his mother Thorne first told his brother Sean, aged sixteen and third oldest behind Thorne. He wanted to test Sean’s reaction and predict that of the rest of the family. Sean looked up to his older brothers, especially to Thorne, whom he admired for his quiet determination and good judgment. “Sean, I‘ve no more doubt that each of our own farms is too small to profit from, so I’ve decided to sell.” Sean’s trusting smile changed to shock and disbelief. He feared Thorne would move away and he might never see his brother again. He peppered questions so fast that Thorne could not answer one without being interrupted by the next. “Where will you go? ... Can I come, too? ... What will you do with the money?” Among all his desperate inquiries Sean did not mention their mother, which encouraged Thorne to take her aside the next day and tell her. “Mother, I know this will come as a shock, but I’ve decided to sell my land.” “Oh, sweet Mary! How could you, Thorne? And with his dying breath, no less.” She collapsed in tears onto the banquette in their living room just as Thorne had feared, and her daughters helped her to bed. He realized that in this his characteristic good judgment had failed him, and it was because of his selfish plan for his own future. So he agreed to postpone his dream for the sake of his mother, although his heart ached for it. Three years passed. It was not enough that farming was something the Gallaghers knew well. They worked their tiny plots as industriously as they could, harder than anyone they knew outside the family. Despite this they barely yielded enough income to feed a family and livestock, or for repairs, improvements, or sometimes even clothing. Thus marriage became an unlikely prospect for most of the brothers. However, Young Kieran, the fifth brother, who was short and stocky with blond hair and boundless energy, seemed a good catch to young women thereabouts. He was fortunate enough to marry a schoolteacher whose meager income kept their little farm solvent. Sean, too, was lucky in love. He married a woman from Kilkenny who not only knew the land, having grown up on a farm, but also brought a fine dowry. Sean’s good fortune encouraged him to start a family immediately, and now his wife carried their third child. But after they spent the dowry it was clear that income from their farm was well below their needs, and now they were hard-pressed to feed even their present small brood. Father Paul knew the strain additional children put on their finances, and he was aware Sean and his wife knew it too. So he pulled them aside after Mass to remind them that eternal perdition awaited Roman Catholic couples who avoided conception by means other than abstinence. Meanwhile Thorne buried his dream of escape by throwing himself into working his little plot. Like Sean and Kieran, he had built a small cottage, and the feeling of independence it afforded helped assuage his yearning to abandon farming. He knew it would be easier if he took a wife, too. At least he would have more time for farming instead of cooking, cleaning and keeping house. But after three years of hardscrabble effort his prospect for succeeding at both farming and rearing a family remained bleak. Today was Saturday, and as usual Thorne labored all day. Normally he worked a half day on Sundays too, but because tomorrow would be Easter he quit his work at lunchtime and spent the afternoon repairing his only suit and white shirt and polishing his Sunday shoes. As he went about his mundane tasks, he remembered an uncle who had gone to sea with the British Navy. He would have called this a “make and mend” day, thought Thorne. He also remembered the stories his seafaring uncle had told about faraway lands, remarkable people, exotic smells and sounds, and exciting near-death adventures. Such reverie was often Thorne’s retreat from the harsh reality of his work and future prospects. Behind it all was a deeper reluctance to confess to his family that he wanted to go to sea. When he had revealed his fascination with ships and the sea as a boy, his family had taunted him. “Sailors are the lowest form of society, Thorne, don’t you know that?” his oldest sister was fond of repeating. “Like tinkers without families, they are, for all love.” His mother added with a sigh, “Yes, dear, always moving and never a chance of peace. The evil they witness can darken their mortal souls, even if they pray to the Virgin for chastity.” “Aww, Ma,” Thorne had replied weakly, embarrassed by his mother’s mention of such things. “Worst of all,” said Michael, the next oldest brother, “The British Navy—whose ships you admire so when they come to Cobh—they don’t welcome Catholics, do they now? Barely tolerate us at all, in fact.” He emphasized the point with a closed fist against his open palm. The next morning Thorne arose before dawn, dressed in his Easter best, and walked to Mass where he sat with his family in their usual pew and allowed the familiar, warm sense of belonging to wash over him, and prayed to know what he should do next. He was ready to give up his land, but he did not know how to get to sea and had no maritime skills. The warships he was so fond of called at Cobh only occasionally. Tangled in his worries, he took a deep breath and exhaled so loudly that worshipers shot him a disapproving look. Then the words of the congregation—chanting in unison—drew his attention. “Pater Noster, qui es in caelis, sanctifcetur nomen tuum. Fiat voluntas tua ... .” It was then he knew that whatever happened, it would be God’s will and therefore all right. Father Paul read the gospel and in his homily reminded the parishioners, “Regardless of whether you are farmers, homemakers, hired laborers, or shopkeepers, your highest calling is to raise a family in the Holy Mother Church and nurture the bodies and souls of your children. Now let us pray for the soul of the recently departed Mr. Adair, proprietor of our local chandlery, who leaves behind his pious wife Brenda and their only child, Rosaleen.” Thorne knew the chandler’s daughter, but only barely. The pretty red-haired girl sat in church next to her mother now, her pale freckled skin seemed illuminated by warm light from the stained glass windows. Thorne saw her flush when the priest mentioned her name. She was a happy girl who liked holding the newest baby born into the parish and caring for the younger children. He watched her in church often, and on two occasions he had managed to exchange a few words with her in front of the church as parishioners mingled after Mass. Today he dared to approach her again. “Good morning, Madame Adair,” he said to the widow. “I deeply regret your loss.” “Thank you, Mr. ... I do not believe I have your name, Sir.” Rosaleen interjected, “It is Gallagher, Mother. Thorne Gallagher.” She said, smiling at Thorne. “Madame Adair and Miss Adair, I hope you will feel free to call on me if there is anything I can do for you.” Just then more parishioners approached to express their sympathy. The crowd jostled Thorne away and he saw Rosaleen glance over her shoulder as if to insure he was still there. He waited for what seemed an eternity for the crowd to dwindle so he could approach her again. Thorne’s mother called to him, asking whether he was coming back with them now. He knew her little house would be filled with the aromas of ham, bacon, eggs, oatmeal and hot cross buns, and that his mother would pull down her best preserves and his sisters would set out steaming pots of coffee, making this their best meal of their year. “I’ll be coming home shortly, Ma.”, he answered. With a knowing glance, she gathered her brood and left him on the steps of the church. A few minutes later he got his chance and approached Rosaleen again. “Mr. Gallagher, it is very kind of you to offer your help,” Rosaleen said before he could speak. “I meant it, of course. How are you getting along?” “Well enough, I suppose. Our relations are surely a blessing, and the other parishioners, too. I am grateful my mother has finally agreed to get out and visit them. I must keep the shop in her absence, but I do not mind.” “I have always been curious about the chandlery business. May I call on you ... ” he hesitated, “ ... call on you there?” “Why, Mr. Gallagher, I would be delighted.” Thorne took her at her word and visited her several times before he found the courage to ask her to a dance. At first Thorne sat bashfully next to Rosaleen, as they watched a line of young girls step high to a lively jig holding hands and dancing with their backs upright, heads high and eyes fixed straight ahead like dragoons on review. By the second reel, Rosaleen was tapping her foot and moving in her chair with the music. Thorne wanted to ask her to dance but was unsure. Would he remember the hurried lessons his sisters gave him? Finally, with the second reel half over, he pulled nervously on his collar, took her hand, and led her onto the dance floor. Initially he felt awkward, but her bright smile, constantly in his line of sight, encouraged him. Soon he was surprised at how easy it was to let go and dance. By the end of the evening he had
 perspired through his smalls, his linen shirt, and even his waistcoat, but he did not care. He had never had more fun with a girl. Although Thorne knew almost immediately that he wanted Rosaleen for his wife, he said nothing while they continued to see each other. He wondered if his feelings might wane over time. But with each day he thought more of settling down and less about going to sea. After six months, he proposed marriage to Rosaleen and she accepted. They asked Father Paul to announce the banns and a formal courtship followed, including a chaperone and—of course—the observation of all the proprieties. The question of the widow Adair’s business naturally came up. She liked Thorne for himself and felt he would make a fine husband for her daughter. She also saw him as a potential successor to manage the business. “Thorne, you have been a Godsend for us. It has been particularly draining for me since my husband died. Now I have neither the inclination nor the wherewithal to run the business.” Rosaleen squeezed his hand while her mother spoke. “Rosaleen told me you would like to learn the chandlery business. That is my wish, too, if you agree.” Thorne replied, “I accept, of course. I’ve longed for such an opportunity.” Then there was the matter of Thorne’s land. Obviously he could not tend to both the chandlery and his farm. Because Thorne’s mother also approved of their marriage, the Gallaghers yielded finally to Thorne selling, but not without heaping guilt upon him. “Of course you are doing the right thing, Thorne. But it will afford your family a resentment they can hold in reserve against us in case they might need it someday,” Rosaleen told him with a wink. “It is the Irish way, I suppose.” Thorne and Rosaleen were married, he assumed management of the business, and his farm passed to a newly arrived English immigrant. Before long he realized how much more fortunate he was than if he had gone to sea. On one hand he was free of slavery to the farm. On the other, he was working now in a maritime trade that required no prolonged absences from his family. Moreover, with money from the sale he expanded the chandlery with new stock and services for the few Royal Navy vessels that occasionally called at Cobh. The business began to grow a little, and Thorne’s family with it. Over the next few years more ships came for supplies and Thorne negotiated contracts with the Admiralty in London that resulted in their town becoming a de facto base for the navy. During this time he naturally made the acquaintance of Englishmen. Although he found that many of them looked down on the Irish, one of his first customers was a friendly young officer named Wiltsie who was first lieutenant of the storm-damaged frigate Iphigenia, 32 guns. His fellow officers good-naturedly called Wiltsie “a King John’s man” because of his short stature, thickset frame, and confident stride. However, his dark eyes sparkled with intelligence in his deeply tanned face and made him seem a man who brooked no purser’s tricks. The fact that he did not wear a wig like some officers was notable, especially considering his bald round head, and it suggested to Thorne that he would be open and fair in his dealings with other people. Before reaching the Celtic Sea on her way home from duty on the American Station, the Iphigenia had beaten unsuccessfully into relentless easterlies for more than a week. Toward the end of that period—in the dark of night during the middle watch—a storm had descended on them and shredded her canvas to a shocking degree and sent spars and rigging overboard. She was finally forced to wear and make for Cobh instead of Portsmouth. When her anchor touched bottom in Grand Island harbor the next morning, the damage was so remarkable that observers guessed mistakenly that she had suffered fire from an enemy ship. That morning Lieutenant Wiltsie felt fortunate to find everything from the chandlery his ship needed for repairs. It pleased his captain, too, who told Thorne candidly when he accompanied Wiltsie there on their way to visit the senior officer in port, “I do not mind telling you, sir, how relieved I am not to deal with the navy’s own yards.” Thorne was surprised at the candor of a Royal Navy captain confessing naval sins to a civilian, let alone to an Irishman. “I do not exaggerate, sir, when I tell you that theft and voracity compete with laziness and incompetence for the upper hand among them. But Wiltsie here tells me you run an honest shop, Mr. Gallagher, and I have heard it said by others as well.” Thorne realized his business was gaining a good reputation with the navy, the vessels of whose captains, first lieutenants, masters and boatswains shared information freely among themselves. Honesty in commerce was particularly important to ships’ captains, who were often forced by the innate penuriousness of their admiralty to rob their own purses for bribe money or to buy extra powder, food and other supplies when their official allowance was exceeded. Wiltsie’s ship had to remain at anchor while they made their repairs, which gave him and Thorne time to become better acquainted. They had in common the fact that Wiltsie had married recently, and that he grew up on a farm in Yorkshire. Thorne invited him for dinner on the second night of his visit to Cobh. Rosaleen and her mother found him charming and well-informed regarding a world they had never seen and only read about. They begged him back for dinner twice more before his ship left. Rosaleen’s mother owned a pianoforte and Wiltsie played it beautifully after dinner as they entertained themselves with music and singing. The night before his departure they made him promise to dine with them again when his ship returned. “I will be delighted,” he said, the warmth of their family removing the sting of absence from his own. “And you must visit my home in England to meet Hortense and our first child to come, of which I learned only this morning by letter.” Rosaleen blushed brightly at this news. Her mother and Thorne looked at her, puzzled. Feeling their stares and the heat upon her face, Rosaleen stammered, “There is another thing we seem to have in common, sir. I have told no one yet because I did not know until today. I, too, am with child.” Thorne’s heart leapt. He swept his wife into his arms and danced across the room with her. Wiltsie raised his glass. “Thorne and Rosaleen, I give you joy of your new command.” Thorne returned the toast and wished Wiltsie and wife well also. Then Lieutenant Wiltsie clapped onto the pianoforte and their singing began again in earnest and lasted well into the night. Thus began a long friendship between the Gallaghers and Wiltsies. The lieutenant eventually became a commander, and it was clear that someday he would captain his own ship. There were long periods when they did not see him, though his regular letters from such faraway places as New York, Halifax, Kingston and even Rio de Janeiro informed them of his adventures and the growth of his family, just as the Gallaghers’ letters did for Wiltsie. The Gallagher family grew in number as the years progressed, and then one day, sadly it diminished. The widow Adair passed away peacefully in her sleep and ownership of the chandlery passed from one family to another. By the year 1798 their oldest child, a son they named Jonathon but whom they called Jack, was five years old. Like his father, the little boy with a wide freckled forehead, hazel eyes and small chin seemed to love the sea. Many times when Jack came with his mother bringing lunch for Thorne, he begged her to linger on the quay to watch a navy ship round the point and go through the complex evolutions of shortening sail, dropping anchor, or mooring in front of his father’s business. When Jack saw the ships his little mouth formed a sweet smile and his eyes sparkled with curiosity and fascination. As Jack’s light brown hair danced on the sea breeze, his mother sensed this amazement in him and she wondered if he would go to sea himself someday. A second son, Eamonn, arrived within a year of Jack. The red-haired Eamonn was full of energy, mischief and friendliness. By contrast, Jack was more serious and thoughtful, and seemed able to focus on specific tasks for longer periods. From the beginning Jack watched out for his little brother, and Eamonn worshiped Jack. Within a few years, two daughters, Fiona and Kathleen, joined them. Finally Bernard, born seven years after Jack, came into their family. By now Cobh was a bustling seaport attracting families of naval officers and other moneyed folk from England. Many bought up small adjacent parcels and some farms were now the size of the original ones owned by the Irish generations ago—or larger. As commerce increased in their little seaport, the Gallaghers’ business thrived and Thorne and Rosaleen became financially comfortable. One could even call them wealthy by Irish standards, which rubbed many Catholic neighbors the wrong way. Some saw the Gallaghers as pawns of the English. If not for their regular attendance at Mass, the Gallaghers might have had no Gaelic friends at all. In fact, they had only a few. They had few English friends, either. Rosaleen assured her husband this was because so many English were newly arrived, but they both knew it was because of their own birthplace and religion. When Jack was six, his parents enjoyed the satisfaction of affording to send him to the English school, which was the best education available outside Dublin. Only a handful of Irish could afford to attend. Without the intercession of Commander Wiltsie the school would not have admitted him at all. Once they allowed him to enroll, they were able to get his brother Eamonn in, too. By the time Jack was sixteen, his face had matured. The only significant feature remaining from his youth was a hank of sandy
 hair that crossed his forehead. His freckles had receded into a fair, luminous complexion. A projecting jaw below his long nose and wide-set eyes had replaced the boyish mouth and small chin. His large forehead and other features combined to give him a look of intelligence. When he walked the halls at school, he sometimes scrunched his left shoulder against his neck trying to relieve recurring pain in his shoulder, an injury from a youthful donnybrook with Eamonn. Eamonn grew to look more like his grandfather, with broad shoulders and a barrel chest on a wiry frame. His red hair remained as bright as when he was an infant. In a land of Irish Catholics, the school was naturally a refuge for English Protestants. Here the teachers felt safe to declare the supremacy of their culture and instill their views on impressionable minds. This sometimes included careless reference to the “superstitious rituals of papists”. The students—especially the younger ones—absorbed, repeated and expanded on these opinions. Jack lost count of the times he overheard schoolmates refer to “the dirty Irish” or suddenly grow silent and embarrassed when he approached. Nevertheless, he adapted well despite a quick temper and a compulsion to be drawn into arguments—something he learned to fight against in himself as he matured. His younger brother provoked him occasionally in the course of the natural conflicts that arose between brothers so close in age, and Jack’s parents warned him that his temper would get him or their family into trouble if he did not learn to control it. So rather than betray his own tongue, he learned to conceal his feelings when someone directed prejudice at him. The environment at school was more difficult for Eamonn, who resented the slightest offense and was less capable of concealing his feelings. As time passed, he had many fights with his classmates. Within a few years his parents feared the school might eventually expel him. Jack controlled his own choleric tendency for the most part, and was near the top of his classes in every subject. His parents expected a great deal from him, and as the eldest, their expectations eventually became his own. They taught him he could not please everyone, nor should he try. His academic excellence created indignation among English classmates whose parents chastised them for allowing an Irish Catholic to best them. He was aware of their antipathy but to his credit, it did not slake his ambition to succeed. He also came to realize his education would pay him dividends more valuable than merely access to English society. He performed well on the cricket pitch, too, and in his other athletic endeavors. Unfortunately, he occasionally lost his temper when the heat of competition brought prejudice closer to the surface. Sometimes he returned from school with his face bloodied or his shirt torn. And occasionally he lost a friend over words spoken in anger. Nevertheless, he shared a love of the sea with many schoolmates: they revealed their boyish fantasies about seafaring to each other. Although some of their fathers were engaged in the maritime trade as officers on merchant vessels, none was associated directly with the navy. Cobh was still only an occasional base for navy replenishment. However, in 1808 the British Navy was trying to hold Napoleon in check as he expanded into Portugal and Spain. As England’s yards became full, Cobh became more popular as an overflow destination for repair and refitting. If going to sea was sought-after by Jack and his schoolmates, then doing so in a frigate or brig-sloop of war was even more so. One evening Jack sat on the quay with two of his schoolmates at sunset as little waves lapped against the stones and the cold, tangy smell of the harbor filled their noses. “Frigates are the epitome of fighting ships, you know,” he pontificated to his rapt listeners. “All the advantages and none of the disadvantages of other vessels.” “Advantages?” asked Oliver Crosby, the youngest. “Well, first they usually engage the enemy alone.” “That’s a bold task, it is,” Oliver said, mesmerized. “Second, unlike a munitions hoy, that fat hulk you see anchored a long way off the point there, or troop transports, tenders and those sorts of auxiliaries, frigates sail right into the way of harm.” “Aye, right into it.” “And their crews have the best chance for prize money. But brig-sloops like that smaller two-masted, sharp sailing vessel,” he said pointing to a sleek warship gliding to her anchorage, “are almost as deadly as frigates.” “Were there frigates at the Battle of the Nile, at all?” asked Oliver. “Aye, there were. The big ships in the line of battle, most of them with at least 74 guns, they formed up across from each other and pounded away, but not the frigates or brigs. The ships of the line just fired away at close range until one of ‘em lost a mast or sank the other one, or struck its colors and surrendered. But frigates didn’t have to stay in the formation. They’re faster and more agile, so the admiral used them to relay signals and orders, flying up and down the line as fast as the wind. They can do a mort of different things. Secret missions, for example.” His listeners’ eyes widened. “And it’s a relief for their captains to get away from the admiral’s oversight, of course. To search for the enemy on their own, which is why I want my first ship to be a frigate!” When sailors from their beloved ships came ashore the boys hurried down to talk with them, pumping them with endless questions. At sixteen Jack had the advantage of knowing more about ships and sailing than most of his schoolmates because he had been working in his father’s business for several years. Because they were so close in age, Eamonn and Jack grew up playing together. They had practiced boyish swordplay with wooden replicas at first. When Jack was eleven and Eamonn was ten they applied themselves with dulled cutlasses and hangers, pretending to repel pirates from boarding their make-believe ship. Five years later, though, with some ill feeling between them, they had not played this way for some time. Their antipathy began when Eamonn was old enough to consider his own future. Because Jack was the oldest, everyone in the family understood he would eventually run the chandlery. Eamonn knew it, too, but he only reluctantly accepted it. Like many teenagers, Eamonn was full of energy and longed for recognition, but he felt thwarted by his circumstances. Jack’s academic success and the attention his parents gave him seemed unfair. Although he loved his older brother, he could not help feeling envious. When he became aware of his envy, he felt ashamed of it. Eventually, as his awareness of the world around him increased, his resentment transferred itself onto the English. In the summer of 1809 Eamonn began attending meetings of the United Irishmen in Waterford. They were a nationalist underground group that had played a central role in the failed uprising against English rule in 1798, an uprising inspired by the French Revolution and Thomas Paine’s writings in America. Five years after that revolt, Robert Emmett attempted another one against the Castle in Dublin, the seat of English rule in Ireland. But that poorly organized and undermanned rebellion also failed. A period of peace followed, but a few rebels traveled to France and petitioned Napoleon himself for help. He was reluctant. His previous attempt to wrest Ireland from England had failed because his troops had arrived to find the Irish militia disorganized and largely indifferent. But this time he agreed to form an Irish Legion within his army as a vanguard for one more French expedition to Ireland. This renewed the hope of the United Irishmen, who had watched private land ownership by native Irish dwindle down to only seven percent. It was a transfer of land that had taken two hundred years. Due to Eamonn’s new uncharacteristically guarded behavior, and because of the distance between Waterford and Cobh, the family was unaware of his rebellious activities. But it was soon clear that his views had taken a radical political turn. Sitting at their dinner table, Thorne announced, “You know tomorrow is Christmas Eve. This year, we will close at the end of the day and not re-open for business until after the New Year. And when we visit the farm this year I will make sure everyone else can be there for Christmas, too.” “That is wonderful, My Dear. But can we afford to?” “We can. I just finished an accounting of our last twelve months, and although costs were higher, our profits doubled.” “I am so proud of you,” Rosaleen said with a tear at the corner of her eye. “When Thorne Gallagher marches away down the Promenade, people will see him and say, ‘Now there goes a solid man.’” “A toast to the navy for their patronage,” Kathleen said as she raised her glass of water gaily. At only twelve, the thin girl with dark hair already displayed a strong sense of personal dignity and enjoyed her privileged status among her girlfriends. Eamonn announced, “I’d sooner toast the Devil.” “What do you mean, son? They’ve put food on our table, clothes on our backs, and more. This is a Christmas we should be grateful for,” Thorne said. “Sure, they’ve thrown us a few guineas and they barely abide us at their school. But do they treat us as equals? They do not. Is their money worth our self-respect?” “Watch your tongue, Eamonn,” his mother cautioned. Jack glared at Eamonn and he shot back a challenging stare. “I’ll have respect from my sons at my own table, or you’ll not eat here, d’ya hear me!” Thorne said angrily. An awkward silence settled on them before Thorne continued, “Although it was a struggle at first,” he smiled gently at Rosaleen, “We’re better off now than anyone in the parish.” Fiona chimed in, “Yes, Dad, but the girls my age won’t speak to me or Kathleen
 at Mass. Why do they treat us so?” The way they were treated was unfortunate, thought Jack as he looked at his sister. Her little face reminded him of a doll’s. Her manner of dress completed the impression. “It’s only because they’re jealous,” Jack answered. “You can’t help that, so try not to think of it. Besides, you have your sister and Bernard to play with.” “You act as if the way they treat us if perfectly acceptable,” Eamonn said. “I say it isn’t. It’ll not stop until ... we rise up and take Ireland back.” They all looked at Eamonn. “Fanciful, son. Pipe dreams that disappear in smoke. There’s been too much blood spilled in vain already. There’ll be no more talk of it.” “It shames me,” Eamonn replied. “I think your father would have been ashamed, too, if he knew!” With that, he rose and stormed out. Thorne closed his eyes and sighed, trying to understand his son’s hostility, and remembered his own father’s dying wish. CHAPTER THREE The Cobh Gallaghers climbed into their handsome new carriage to visit the old family farm for Christmas. Mainly they were silent, affected by Eamonn’s brooding. But when they arrived the cottage door burst open and the youngest nephews and nieces flew out to greet them. Their parents followed, cooing with envy at the shiny carriage and two handsome horses. Two of Thorne’s brothers lingered on the porch with their hands stuffed deep in their trouser pockets as they watched Thorne’s well-dressed family unload presents from the boot. After exchanging gifts they sat down to a big Christmas dinner and Thorne’s mother asked, “How do the children like their school?” He knew she did not approve of her grandchildren attending a Protestant school, but he realized she was being polite. Rosaleen volunteered, “They are doing very well, Mrs. Gallagher. Thank you for asking. The subjects are challenging, as you would expect, but they work hard at their studies.” “And are they happy there, my dear?” Eamonn looked up from his plate, but seeing his mother and father’s glare, decided not to speak. The widow Gallagher noticed Eamonn’s look and retreated. “Well, parents know best. I am so happy for your good fortune in business, Thorne. We thank you for the help you give me with expenses here. With only Margaret and me, the upkeep is sometimes beyond us.” Margaret adjusted her thin torso to sit more upright. Her plain face, pinched and stern, barely hid the pride she felt at watching over her mother. Padraig, Thorne’s oldest brother, wiped his face with his napkin, pushed back his chair and stood by the table in a self-conscious pose. “I have an announcement,” he said, whistling slightly through the gap in his front teeth. He paused, not sure how to say it. “I sold my land.” The clatter of forks and knives on china dwindled as everyone stopped eating. The only noise came from the younger children playing outside. “My family and I will take the money and go to Dublin, where I hear there is plenty of work.” “Och! Padraig, dear!” exclaimed the widow Gallagher, “Dublin is so far away.” “We had no choice, Ma. The farm could not make a profit, or even support our little family. I admit it. We should have got out long ago like you, Thorne.” “The bloody Prods will own all of Ireland at this rate,” Eamonn cut in. Thorne shot him an angry look. “Come and join us in the business, instead, Padraig,” said Thorne. “I cannot offer you much right now, but at least you could stay in Cobh.” Rosaleen beamed at her husband with pride for his generosity. “I thank you, Thorne, but I know I can earn more in Dublin. I’m ready for the city, too.” Padraig exchanged a look with his wife that told them they had not come to their decision easily. “At least you can join a combination in Dublin,” Eamonn said. What is a combination?” asked Padraig. “A bunch of workers that come together to fight for better wages and working conditions in the factories and shops,” Eamonn replied, enthused. “The English own all of the businesses now anyway, so the combination keeps them in mind of their obligations to workers.” “Do they, now?” asked Padraig, interested. “Do not forget, Eamonn,” said Rosaleen, “that our business is our own.” Kieran, Thorne’s youngest brother, hoisted a glass of stout. “And we cannot forget Mr. Guinness either, bless him. Another Irishman who still owns his own business.” This raised their spirits a little and the dinner continued with no more bad news, though Thorne noticed that Sean, his next youngest brother, had an odd manner about him. It was within a few months after Thorne and his family returned to Cobh that they learned Sean had sold his land, too, and planned to work for wages on one of the new English farms nearby. Sean could not bring himself to leave the land, even if it meant working on someone else’s. Two more years passed and the Gallaghers’ business continued to grow. In his last years at school, Jack made more acquaintances. One invited him to a boating race on the harbor. Charles was the son of a wealthy English landowner. He had inherited from his father a strong head and neck atop a barrel chest. Leaning back in his dignified posture, he asked, “My friends and I were wondering, Jack. Would you be interested in joining us on Sunday at the Water Club? I understand your family is familiar with nautical matters. We could use a hand aboard my father’s yacht.” “Yes, I love sailing,” Jack replied. “My brother Eamonn is a fine sailor, too.” Charles paused, inhaling deeply through his nose. “I am afraid there is only enough room for you, Jack.” “All right then. I will see you there on Sunday,” Jack said, excitement growing at the thought of dashing over the harbor in one of their grand boats. Over the past ninety years racing sailboats had grown into an organized sport, particularly in the Cove of Cork. However, it was a sport reserved for royalty or the wealthy. This meant that membership of the Cork Harbour Water Club was exclusively English. Royalty and courtiers took their leisure there often, but common folk seldom did. After their move from Haulbowline Island to Cobh four years before to make room for the navy, the club had expanded their facilities and they were now quite grand. As Jack drew near the imposing building, he saw a liveried guard at the gate and felt apprehensive, suddenly conscious of the social difference between himself and his hosts. He reassured himself that Charles probably had invited him as much because of his maritime expertise as for any other reason. He thought if he sailed well, they would accept him. He often saw the club’s vessels sailing in the harbor. Sometimes they moved in formations, copying naval maneuvers and communicating with signal flags and small cannons. It was said that they even maintained their own private signal codes in further imitation of the navy. Although his love of warships and admiration for the sailors’ life made him feel it was an odd thing for wealthy men to imitate the navy—perhaps even a bit undignified for grown men—their boats nevertheless impressed him. They were as fast and exciting to watch as any he had ever seen. After all, they often built them on the basic design of the fastest of naval vessels—revenue cutters and pilot boats. They encompassed virtually all the latest technology in the world, and their owners further improved them as far as available knowledge and individual finances allowed.

O'Loughlin, Joseph (2015-04-16T23:58:59). Gallagher’s Prize: An Historical Adventure Novel in the Age of Sail (Kindle Locations 59-595). Pintle Publishing. Kindle Edition. 

EIGHT BELLS had chimed out from the forecastle and the lower deck was cleared while the ship moved steadily, purposefully some would say, toward the widening span of land, which seemed to reach out on either bow. The moment every sailor carried in his thoughts. The landfall. This landfall. Home. The sails, already reduced to topsails and jibs, were hardly filling, the tough canvas still shedding moisture like rain from the final, overnight approach. Hills and cliffs, at first in shadow and then opening up to the watery sunshine. Landmarks, familiar to some of the older hands, the names of others called down by the masthead lookouts while the land gained shape and colour, dark green in some places, but the brown of winter still clinging elsewhere. For it was early March 1817, and the air was as keen as a knife. Eight days out of Gibraltar, a fair passage when set against the adverse winds which had challenged every mile as they had skirted the Bay of Biscay, up and around the well-remembered names of Ushant and Brest, the enemy coast for so long. It was still hard to believe that those days had changed. As had the life of every man aboard this graceful, slow-moving frigate, His Britannic Majesty’s ship Unrivalled of 46 guns, and a complement of two hundred and fifty sailors and Royal Marines. Or so it had been when they had left this same port of Plymouth. Now there was a sense of contained excitement, and uncertainty. There were boys who had become men while the ship had been away. They would find a different life waiting upon their return. And the older ones, like Joshua Cristie, the sailing-master, and Stranace the gunner, would be thinking of the many ships which had been paid off, hulked, or even sold to those same enemies from the past. For this was all they had. They knew no other life. The long masthead pendant lifted and held in a sudden flurry of wind. Partridge, the burly boatswain, as rotund as his namesake, called, “Lee braces there! Stand by, lads!” But even he, whose thick voice had contested the heaviest gales and crashing broadsides, seemed unwilling to break the silence. There were now only shipboard noises, the creak of spars and rigging, the occasional thud of the tiller head, their constant companions over the months, the years since Unrivalled’s keel had first tasted salt water; that, too, right here in Plymouth. And nobody alive this day would be more aware of the challenge which might now be confronting him. Captain Adam Bolitho stood by the quarterdeck rail and watched the land edging out in a slow and final embrace. Buildings, even a church, were taking shape, and he saw a fishing lugger on a converging tack, a man climbing into the rigging to wave as the frigate’s shadow passed over him. How many hundreds of times had he stood in this place? As many hours as he had walked the deck, or been called from his cot for some emergency or other. Like the last time in Biscay, when a seaman had been lost overboard. It was nothing new. A familiar face, a cry in the night, then oblivion. Perhaps he, too, had been thinking of going home. Or leaving the ship. It only took a second; a ship had no forgiveness for carelessness or that one treacherous lapse of attention. He shook himself and gripped the scabbard of the old sword beneath his coat, something else he did without noticing it. He glanced along his command, the neat batteries of eighteen-pounders, each muzzle exactly in line with the gangway above it. The decks clean and uncluttered, each unwanted piece of cordage flaked down, while sheets and braces were loosened in readiness. The scars of that last savage battle at Algiers, a lifetime ago or so it felt sometimes, had been carefully repaired, painted or tarred, hidden except to the eye of the true sailor. A block squeaked and without turning his head he knew that the signals party had hoisted Unrivalled’s number. Not that many people would need telling. It was only then that you remembered. Roger Cousens had been the signals midshipman. Keen, caring, likeable. Another missing face. He felt the northwesterly wind on his cheek, like a cold hand. A voice said quietly, “Guard-boat, sir.” No excitement. More like two men exchanging a casual remark in a country lane. Adam Bolitho took a telescope from another midshipman, his eyes passing over familiar figures and groups which were like part of himself. The helmsmen, three in case of any last second’s trick by the wind or tide; the master, one hand on a chart but his eyes on the land. A squad of marines paraded, ready if needed to support the afterguard at the mizzen braces. The first lieutenant, a boatswain’s mate, and two marine drummer boys who seemed to have grown since they had last seen Plymouth. He steadied the glass and saw the guard-boat, oars tossed, quite motionless at this distance. His jaw tightened. It was what his uncle had called marking the chart for us. It was time. Not too soon, and never too late. He said, “Hands wear ship, Mr Galbraith!” He could almost feel the first lieutenant’s eyes. Surprise? Acceptance? The danger was past. Formality had taken over. “Lee braces there! Hands wear ship!” “Tops’l sheets!” Seamen strained back on braces and halliards. A boatswain’s mate pushed two extra hands to add their strength as Unrivalled continued toward her allotted anchorage. “Helm a-lee!” The slightest hesitation, and the big double wheel began to swing over, helmsmen moving like a single body. Adam Bolitho shaded his eyes as the sunlight lanced between the shrouds and flapping canvas, as the ship, his ship, turned steadily into the wind. He saw his coxswain watching across the busy deck, waiting to call away the gig, ready for the unexpected. “Let go!” The great anchor dropped from the cathead, spray bursting up and over the beautiful figurehead. After all the miles, the pain and the triumph, for better or worse, Unrivalled had come home. Lieutenant Leigh Galbraith looked aloft to make certain that the excitement of returning to England had not allowed slackness to mar the sail drill. Each sail was neatly furled, the masthead pendant curling in the offshore wind, the ensign streaming above the taffrail, bright against the land, hoisted to replace a well-worn and ragged one before the dawn had broken. Marine sentries were posted to prevent unlawful visitors, traders, even some of the local whores, coming aboard when they realized that Unrivalled’s company had had little to spend their pay on over the past months. And there was talk of slave bounty, and prize-money, too. He watched the guard-boat approaching, an officer standing in the sternsheets shading his eyes. Their first contact with authority since leaving the Rock. Unrivalled would probably be invaded now by riggers and carpenters, some of whom might have helped to build her more than two years ago. He shivered again. But it was not the bite of the March wind. He had seen the ranks of laid-up ships, large and small, as Unrivalled had tacked slowly toward the anchorage. Proud ships, famous names. Some had already been here when they’d last left Plymouth for the Mediterranean and Algiers, eight months ago. Who would be next? He confronted it, as a senior officer might examine a subordinate’s chances. His record was good. He had taken part in every action at Algiers and before. Captain Bolitho had already recommended him for a command of his own, had put it in writing to the flag-officer here in Plymouth before they had sailed. Suppose there was nothing? He might remain first lieutenant for yet another commission, until he was passed over altogether. He dismissed it angrily. He had a ship, and a fine one, more than many could claim. He walked to the entry port and touched his hat as the officer of the guard clambered aboard. The visitor glanced around the upper-deck and said, “Heard all about it, your part at Algiers! Lord Exmouth was full of praise in the Gazette!” He handed Galbraith a thick, sealed envelope. “For the captain.” He inclined his head toward the shore. “From the admiral.” He looked over at some of the bustling seamen, disappointed perhaps that there were no wounded on view, no shot holes in the freshly painted black and white hull. “Another boat is coming to collect the despatches, and any mail you have to go.” He reached for the guard ropes and added with a grin, “Welcome home, by the way!” Galbraith saw him over the side, and the oars were thrashing at the water almost before he had taken his seat. Galbraith made his way aft, ducking without thought beneath the overhanging poop. Past the wardroom, empty but for a messman; everyone else would be on deck, sharing it. The marine at the cabin door stamped his foot and bawled, “First lieutenant, sir!” It was something you never got used to, he thought. Every Royal Marine seemed to act as if he were on a parade ground, and not within the close confines of a ship. The screen door opened and young Napier, the captain’s servant, in his best blue coat, stood before him. Galbraith took it all in at a glance. The great cabin which he had come to know so well, where they had talked, and shared their thoughts as much as any captain and first lieutenant could; and it was rare in many cases he had known. Times of anxiety and doubt. And of pride. Some clothing was scattered across the stern bench, the captain’s patched and faded seagoing gear, while his best frock coat hung swaying from the skylight. Bolitho glanced at Galbraith and smiled. “Is my gig called away?” Then, half turned, “Here, David, help me with this sleeve—a few more minutes won’t matter. The admiral will know we are anchored.” Galbraith hesitated, and held out the envelope. “This is from the admiral, sir.” Bolitho took it and turned it over in sun-browned hands. “The ink is scarce dry, Leigh.” But the smile had gone, and the cabin could have been empty as he picked
 up a knife to slit it open. Feet pounded overhead and blocks squealed as the boatswain’s party made ready to hoist out the gig. The required formality of a ship’s return from active service. Galbraith heard none of it, watching the captain’s fingers curl around the envelope, its broken seal shining like blood from a sharpshooter’s musket. He said, “Is something wrong, sir?” Adam Bolitho turned sharply, his face hidden in shadow. “I just told you . . .” He checked himself with obvious effort, as Galbraith had seen many times when they had been coming to know one another. “Forgive me.” He looked at Napier. “Never mind about the sleeve. They can take me as they find me.” He touched the boy’s shoulder. “And rest that leg. Remember what the surgeon told you.” Napier shook his head, but said nothing. “The ship will be moved. Repairs and general overhaul . . . as you were doubtless expecting.” He reached out as if to touch the white-painted timber, but dropped his hand to his side. “She can certainly do with it, after the battering she took at Algiers.” As if he were speaking to the ship and nobody else. He brushed against the hanging coat and added, “Tomorrow you will receive orders from the flag-captain. We can discuss it when I return aboard.” He stared at the envelope still crumpled in his hand. He must think clearly. Empty his mind, as he had forced himself to do when everything had seemed finished. Lost. Two people he had come to know so well since he had taken command of Unrivalled, just over two years ago here in Plymouth: he had been her first captain. Galbraith, strong, reliable, concerned. And the boy David Napier who had almost died, the great, jagged splinter jutting from his leg like some obscene weapon. He had been so brave, then and again later under the surgeon’s knife when the wound had become poisoned. Perhaps like himself at that age . . . His hands felt as though they were shaking, and the clamour in his mind seemed loud enough to fill the cabin. When he spoke, his voice was very calm. “I shall be losing Unrivalled. I am being relieved of command.” So quietly said, while that same voice within screamed, It can’t be true! Not this ship! Not yet! Galbraith took a pace toward him, the strong features laid bare with disbelief and then anger, feeling the hurt like his own. “It must be wrong, sir. Some fool of a clerk at the Admiralty!” He spread his hands. “After everything you’ve done? Even the officer of the guard was full of it, all about Lord Exmouth’s praise for Unrivalled in the Gazette!” Adam reached for his coat but Napier was already holding it, troubled, but still unable to understand what it would mean. Somehow it helped to steady him. “Stay with me, David. There are things I must do.” He recalled suddenly what Napier had said when Rear-Admiral Thomas Herrick had asked him if he took care of his captain. We take care of each other. So simply said, yet in this impossible, reeling daze it was something to cling to. Little enough. He said, “Tell the others, Leigh. I’ll speak to them later, perhaps in here.” His dark eyes flashed, revealing real pain for the first time. “While I still can.” Galbraith said, “The gig will be alongside, sir.” They paused, and abruptly shook hands. No words, and beyond thoughts. The Royal Marine stamped his boots together as they passed him and walked to the companion ladder; in an hour it would be all over the ship. But all the sentry saw was his captain and the first lieutenant, with the youth in the proud blue coat walking a pace or two behind them. Galbraith took a deep breath as the companion opened to the clear, bright sky, feeling his shirt drag against the wound where a musket ball had scored his shoulders that day amid the burning madness of Algiers. Another inch, maybe less, and he would not be alive now. He saw the captain turn to nod to somebody on the quarter-deck; he even smiled. Another command, maybe. Something bigger, grander, as a reward for his actions under Lord Exmouth. In these times, it seemed unlikely. Unrivalled was his ship. They had become one. We all did. He recalled the officer of the guard’s cheerful words, less than an hour ago. Welcome home, by the way! When he looked again, Bolitho was standing alone by the entry port; Napier had already gone down into the gig which was waiting alongside, oars tossed and steady like white bones. Luke Jago, the captain’s coxswain, would be there, vigilant, as Galbraith had seen even in the midst of a sea fight. He probably knew or guessed, the navy’s way, the family as the old Jacks said. The marines presented arms, and the calls trilled in salute. When Galbraith replaced his hat the entry port was empty. Welcome home. The admiral’s flag-lieutenant was tense, even embarrassed. “Sir Robert requests that you wait a few moments, Captain Bolitho.” His hand rested on the adjoining door. “An unexpected visitor . . . you understand, sir.” Adam walked into the other room, light and spacious, as he remembered it from previous visits. When he had been given Unrivalled, fresh from the builder’s yard, the first to carry her name on the Navy List. And later, meeting Vice-Admiral Valentine Keen, when Keen had held this command. And last year, in July, when he had joined Lord Exmouth’s fleet for the inevitable attack on Algiers. In those eight months so much had happened, while here in Plymouth there was yet another admiral, Sir Robert Burch, probably in his last appointment. The lieutenant was saying, “We all watched you arrive, sir. It is some time since I have witnessed such crowds. Some must have been awake before dawn.” Adam laid his hat on a chair and walked to a window. It was not the flag-lieutenant’s fault; it rarely was. He had been one himself. He bit his lip. Under his uncle. Another world, it seemed now. And his uncle . . . Sir Richard Bolitho had died nearly two years ago, killed on the deck of his flagship Frobisher, cut down by a single shot. The memory still burned as if it were yesterday. The other man watched his face closely, trying to miss nothing. The young frigate captain whose name had appeared in the Gazette so many times, fighting hand to hand against any foe which had offered itself, before the war had ended and the sworn enemies had moved into an uneasy alliance. How long might it last? And for what reason? Perhaps the battle of Algiers would come to be remembered as the last great battle under sail. Lord Exmouth had been a frigate captain, probably the most famous and successful to emerge from that everlasting war. He must have put all doubts aside to break the unwritten rule he had always followed: Never force an action where ships are pitted against sited shore batteries, and in his case a thousand enemy guns. But the gamble and the skill had prevailed, and the battle had raged for most of the day. Ships had exploded and burned, men had fought to the death. He thought of the smartly handled frigate he had watched only this morning, shining in the early sunlight, and of Lord Exmouth’s words. I want you in the van. The same ship. He glanced again at the slim figure by the window, the black hair, the fine, sensitive features. The same captain. Adam could feel the scrutiny. He was used to it. The frigate captain: dashing, uncaring, not tied to the fleet’s apron strings. He knew well enough what they thought. Imagined. He opened the window slightly and looked down at a squad of Royal Marines paraded in the square below. New recruits from the local barracks, very stiff and aware of their scarlet uniforms. A sergeant, rocking back slightly on his heels, was saying, “You obey orders without question, see? When the time comes you will be sent to a ship of the line, or a frigate maybe, like the one that came in this morning.” He had turned slightly to display the three bright chevrons on his sleeve. “But remember this, it’s not the colonel, or even the adjutant, who will decide.” He lifted his elbow a fraction. “It will be me, see?” Adam closed the window, the cold air still on his lips. He thought of Corporal Bloxham, who was now a sergeant, a crack shot even with his “Bess,” as he had affectionately called his musket that day. When he had fired one shot and had saved his captain’s life, and that of the boy who had lain helpless, his leg pinioned by the splinter. Another face he had come to know so well. The flag-lieutenant said quickly, “I think the visitor is leaving, sir.” They faced each other, and he added, “It has been an honour to meet you, sir.” Adam heard voices, doors slamming, someone half-running, perhaps to summon a carriage for the departing visitor. He picked up his hat. “I would that it were under better circumstances.” He thrust out his hand. “But thank you. Yours is no easy role. I know from experience.” A bell tinkled somewhere, and the flag-lieutenant seemed to make up his mind. “Unrivalled will be docked, sir. But the reports have made it very clear that it will not be a quick overhaul like the last one.” Adam almost smiled. “The last two.” He touched his arm as they walked to the door; it reminded him of the court martial after Anemone had been sunk. Prisoner and escort. “Then I am not being replaced?” The lieutenant swallowed hard. He had already gone too far. He answered, “My late father had a saying, sir, when things seemed against him. ‘Look to a new horizon.’” He flushed as Adam turned to face him. He would never forget that expression. He called, “Captain Adam Bolitho, Sir Robert!” Adam gripped the old sword and pressed it against his thigh. The reminder. He was not alone. Luke Jago, the captain’s coxswain, walked to the edge of the jetty and kicked a pebble into the water. He was restless, unsure of his feelings and unable to think clearly, which was almost unknown for him. He was the captain’s right-hand man, trusted by him, a position he had come to value more than
 he would ever have believed. It was sometimes hard to recall how it had been before that day, the handshake which had changed everything. The anger and bitterness were part of another life. He had been unjustly flogged at the order of a very different captain; even though an officer had spoken up for him and proved his innocence, it had been too late to prevent the punishment. There had been apologies, but the stripes of the “cat” would remain on his back until the day he died. It was Jago’s nature to mistrust officers, and the younger they were the harder it became to overcome it. Green young midshipmen who might listen to his advice, tricks learned after his years at sea in one kind of ship or another, could suddenly turn and snap like spoiled puppies when they found their feet. He shaded his eyes and stared across at the anchored frigate. His ship, his home for just over two years. He should be used to it. There had been other days like this one. He had listened to it all the way from Gibraltar. Hard men and young hopefuls alike, going home, getting the prize-money and slave bounty they knew was their due. In the navy it was always dangerous to hope too much, or take things for granted. When they had left Plymouth eight months back, he had seen all the laid-up ships, the hulks, once the pride of a great fleet. When Unrivalled had anchored yesterday they had still been here. He heard the boy, Napier, moving restlessly on the pile of baggage they had brought ashore less than an hour ago. His portly, round-shouldered companion was Daniel Yovell, who had volunteered to join the ship as captain’s clerk when he had heard that the previous one had died. Or so Yovell had claimed. Jago knew differently now. Yovell had been clerk to Sir Richard Bolitho, then secretary aboard his flagship. And his friend, an unlikely one to find in a man-of-war. Stooped, gentle, and devout, he had been given his own cottage next to the old Bolitho house in Falmouth where he had helped in estate matters, things Jago could not begin to guess at. But something had drawn Yovell back to the sea, and he had brought with him volunteers when Captain Adam had been short of trained hands. Men from Sir Richard’s last ship, and some who had served him earlier during the wars. Jago kicked another pebble into the water. All those bloody enemies who were now supposed to be treated as allies. And the boy, Napier, what must he be thinking, he wondered. Like many before him, he had been signed into the navy by his mother. She had remarried, and was now in America with her new husband, if that was what he was; Jago knew of plenty such cases. With the offspring safely signed on, the interest faded. Napier was devoted to the captain, and Bolitho never seemed too busy to explain things to him. Whatever the fools on the mess-deck believed, there was nobody in a King’s ship who was as lonely as her captain. Napier said suddenly, “Boat’s casting off!” He sounded tense, anxious. He was always a serious sort of youth. Jago, who went where he chose as the captain’s coxswain, had seen life in the great cabin, beyond the screen doors and the scarlet-coated “bullock.” It had made him feel a part of it. He heard the distant splash of oars and the familiar creak of looms and found that he was clenching his fists. His mouth was very dry. What about me? Yovell would go to his cottage. The boy was staying with the captain. He stared at the anchored frigate again. And Unrivalled was going into the yard, as he had known she would. All those engagements, when she had shuddered and lurched to the enemy’s iron as it had smashed into the hull, often below the waterline. And that last time at Algiers, when so many had fallen, while the air quivered to cannon fire and splintering timbers—had the fools forgotten that too? Or that on this last passage home, the pumps had been going throughout every watch? Unrivalled would be paid off. After that . . . It would be decided by those who’d never heard a full broadside, or risked everything just to hold a mate’s hand when his life was being torn from him. He would collect his pay and his bounty and take some time for himself. Some company maybe. A woman if she came his way. Captain Bolitho might not get another ship. He would not need a coxswain. He was sharply reminded of the captain’s face when he had returned from seeing the port admiral. He frowned. That had been yesterday. Jago had had the gig at this same jetty, the boat’s crew in their smartest rig, as always. A ship is always judged by her boats, someone had once said. He was right, whoever he was. A captain’s crew had to be the best of all. It wasn’t even Unrivalled’s proper gig; that had been too badly smashed by canister and musket fire to warrant repair. Like some of her original crew. It suddenly hit him. Captain Bolitho had walked down those same stone stairs. Millions of sea officers must have come and gone that way, to promotion, a new ship, to accept orders or face a court martial. It was easy to imagine. But yesterday the captain had called him aside on this jetty, to tell him that he was being relieved of his command, and was awaiting fresh orders. Not the first lieutenant, or any of the other officers. He told me first. He said abruptly, “How’s the leg, David?” The boy looked at him, surprised by the use of his name. Like the captain. “It’s getting better.” He walked carefully to the edge of the jetty, his eyes on the gig, the same one which had brought them and their kit ashore. Yovell was on his feet too, watching Jago, remembering their first meeting last year, when Jago had suggested that he was too old for a seagoing job of any kind. They had become friends since then, although neither would ever understand the other. Except today. Yovell had been there as Captain Adam Bolitho had gone through the final tasks before departure. Papers to be signed and witnessed by Lieutenant Galbraith before he assumed temporary command, probably the only command he would ever hold, although Yovell knew from the dictated letters that the captain had never stopped requesting it on Galbraith’s behalf. He had seen the other side of things when some post had been brought aboard from a courier brig, letters they might have missed several times in the Mediterranean. But not letters he had been expecting, hoping for. Like the small scrap of paper he kept in his personal log book, from the girl he had met on that last visit to Plymouth. He had never spoken her name. But Yovell had seen her just once, when he had been at the old Bolitho house in Falmouth, and a courier had come with orders for Unrivalled and her captain. In a little pony-drawn trap, side by side before she had driven away alone. He had seen him kiss his own wrist, where some tears had splashed down. Like lovers, he had thought. Perhaps another dream? He put his hand on Napier’s shoulder and said, “The hardest part.” Who was he speaking to? He saw the gig turning slowly toward the jetty steps. At another time it might have been manned entirely by captains of the fleet or squadron. But today, only the abandoned hulks were the spectators. Jago’s lip curled. “What a crew!” He almost spat on the cobbles. “Officers!” The lieutenants Galbraith, Varlo, and young Bellairs, who had been a midshipman when Unrivalled had first commissioned. Luxmore, the captain of marines, Partridge the boatswain, even Old Blane the carpenter. Midshipmen too, with Deighton at the tiller by the captain’s shoulder. The bowman, another midshipman, shipped his oar and scrambled into the bows with his boathook, but almost pitched headlong. “Toss your oars!” In the sudden silence there was cheering, unbroken but faint in the cold offshore breeze. Yovell felt the boy’s shoulder shiver under his hand. He was an imaginative youth; perhaps he was thinking the same. That the cheers might have come from those listless, empty ships. Captain Adam Bolitho stood up carefully and waited for the gig to come fast against the stairs. He heard and saw none of it. It was like a confused dream, and yet each phase stood out as a separate picture. Handshakes, faces thrusting through a mist to speak, to call something, a fist reaching out as he had found his way to the entry port. Even the shrill of calls had sounded different, as if he were an onlooker, somewhere else. If he had given in . . . He gripped his sword more tightly. He had seen it happen to others, and it had happened to him. He glanced through the tossed oars and saw the ship. His ship. The cheering did not stop. All those faces. But this was not the moment. Turn away. Do not look back. How it was. Had to be in the navy, if you wanted to survive. And now emotion was the greatest enemy. He stepped onto the jetty. Nobody spoke. The boat cast off. Never look back. But he did, then he raised his hat, not soon enough to shield his eyes from the hard glare. They were smarting anyway. Do not look back. He should have known. Jago was here. “You decided then, Luke?” Jago watched him impassively, then thrust out his hand. “Like before, eh, Cap’n?” Adam nodded to the others. The carriage would be here from Falmouth; the admiral had made the arrangements, barely able to conceal his relief that their brief meeting was over. He looked again, but the gig was hidden by the jetty wall. Tonight Galbraith would sit in the great cabin and drink alone. In the same breath, he knew he would not.

Kent, Alexander (2004-08-31T23:58:59). Man of War (The Bolitho Novels Book 26) (Kindle Locations 116-428). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

ENGLISH HARBOUR , in fact the whole island of Antigua, seemed to crouch motionless as if pinned down by the noon sun. The air was humid and oppressively hot, so that the many vessels scattered at anchor were blurred in heavy haze, like reflections in a steamy looking-glass. This October in 1804 was only days old, the middle of the hurricane season, and one of the worst on record. Several ships had been lost at sea, or driven ashore when they had been caught in some dangerous channel. English Harbour was the important, some said vital, headquarters for the fleet which served the Caribbean and to the full extent of the Leeward and Windward Islands. Here was a fine anchorage, a dockyard where even the most serious damage and refitting could be carried out. But peace or war, the sea and the weather were constant enemies, and whereas almost every foreign flag was assumed to be hostile, the dangers of these waters were never taken for granted. English Harbour was some twelve miles from the capital, St John’s, and so the social life in and around the dockyard was limited. On a flagged terrace of one of the better houses flanking the hillside behind the harbour, a group of people, mostly officials and their ladies, stood wilting in the unmoving air watching the approach of a man-of-war. It seemed to have taken an eternity for the newcomer to gain substance and shape through the shimmering haze, but now she stood, bows-on to the land, her sails all but flat against her stays and yards. Ships-of-war were too commonplace for mention. After years of conflict with France and her allies, such sights were part of these people’s daily lives. This one was a ship of the line, a two-decker, her rounded black and buff hull making a sharp contrast with the milky water and the sky which seemed without colour in the unwavering heat. The sun stood directly above Monk’s Hill and was encircled with silver; somewhere out at sea there would be another storm very soon. This ship was different in one respect from other comings and goings. News had been brought by a guardboat that she was from England. To those watching her painstaking approach, just the name of England created so many images. Like a letter from home, a description from some passing sailor. Uncertain weather, shortages, and a daily fear of a French invasion across the Channel. As varied as the land itself, from lush countryside to city squalor. There was hardly a man or woman watching the two-decker who would not have traded Antigua for a mere glimpse of England. One woman stood apart from the others, her body quite still, except for her hand, which used a fan with economical care to revive the heavy air. She had tired long ago of the desultory conversation of the people she had come to know and recognise out of necessity. Some of their voices were already slurred with overheated wine, and they had not even sat down to eat as yet. She turned to conceal her discomfort as she plucked the ivory gown away from her skin. And all the while she watched the ship. From England. The vessel could have been quite motionless but for a tiny feather of white foam beneath her thrusting, gilded figurehead. Two longboats were leading her inshore, one on either bow; she could not see if they were attached to their mother ship by line or not. They too were barely moving, and only the graceful rise and fall of their oars, pale like wings, gave a hint of effort and purpose. The woman knew a great deal about ships; she had travelled many hundreds of leagues by sea, and had an eye for their complex detail. A voice from the past seemed to linger in her mind, which had described a ship as man’s most beautiful creation. She could hear him add, and as demanding as any woman. Someone behind her remarked, “Another round of official visits, I suppose?” No one answered. It was too hot even for speculation. Feet clattered on stone steps and she heard the same voice say, “Let me know when you get any more news.” The servant scurried away while his master opened a scrawled message from somebody in the dockyard. “She’s the Hyperion, seventy-four. Captain Haven.” The woman watched the ship but her mind was drawn to the name. Why should it startle her in some way? Another voice murmured, “Good God, Aubrey, I thought she was a hulk. Plymouth, wasn’t it?” Glasses clinked, but the woman did not move. Captain Haven? The name meant nothing. She saw the guardboat pulling wearily towards the tall two-decker. She loved to watch incoming ships, to see the activity on deck, the outwardly confused preparations until a great anchor splashed down. These sailors would be watching the island, many for the first time. A far cry from the ports and villages of England. The voice commented, “Yes, she was. But with this war spreading every day, and our people in Whitehall as unprepared as ever, I suspect that even the wrecks along our coastline will be drummed into service.” A thicker tone said, “I remember her now. Fought and took a damned great three-decker single-handed. No wonder the poor old girl was laid up after that, eh, what?” She watched, hardly daring to blink as the two-decker’s shape lengthened, her sails being brailed up while she swung so slowly into whatever breeze she could discover. “She’s no private ship, Aubrey.” Interest had moved the man to the balustrade. “God, she wears an admiral’s flag.” “Vice- Admiral,” corrected his host. “Very interesting. She’s apparently under the flag of Sir Richard Bolitho, Vice-Admiral of the Red.” The anchor threw up a column of spray as it fell from the cathead. The woman flattened one hand on the balustrade until the heat of the stone steadied her. Her husband must have seen her move. “What is it? Do you know him? A true hero, if half what I’ve read can be believed.” She gripped the fan more tightly and pressed it to her breast. So that was how it would be. He was here in Antigua. After all this time, after all he had endured. No wonder she had remembered the ship’s name. He had often spoken so affectionately of his old Hyperion. One of the first ships he had ever commanded as a captain. She was surprised at her sudden emotion, more so at her ability to conceal it. “I met him. Years ago.” “Another glass of wine, gentlemen?” She relaxed, muscle by muscle, aware of the dampness of her gown, of her body within it. Even as she thought about it she cursed herself for her stupidity. It could not be like that again. Never. She turned her back on the ship and smiled at the others. But even the smile was a lie. Richard Bolitho stood uncertainly in the centre of the great stern cabin, his head cocked to the sudden thud of bare feet across the poop. All the familiar sounds crowded into the cabin, the muffled chorus of commands, the responding squeal of blocks as the yards were braced round. And yet there was hardly any movement. Like a phantom ship. Only the tall, shimmering bars of gold sunlight which moved along one side of the cabin gave any real hint that Hyperion was swinging slowly into the offshore wind. He watched as the land edged in a green panorama across the first half of the stern windows. Antigua. Even the name was like a stab in the heart, a reawakening of so many memories, so many faces and voices. It was here in English Harbour where, as a newly appointed commander, he had been given his very first command, the small, lithe sloop-of-war, Sparrow. A different kind of vessel, but then the war with the rebellious Americans had been different also. How long ago it all seemed. Ships and faces, pain and elation. He thought of the passage here from England. You could not ask for a faster one—thirty days, with the old Hyperion responding like a thoroughbred. They had stayed in company with a convoy of merchantmen, several of which had been packed with soldiers, reinforcements or replacements for the chain of English garrisons throughout the Caribbean. More likely the latter, he thought grimly. Soldiers were known to die like flies out here from one fever or another without ever hearing the crack of a French musket. Bolitho walked slowly to the stern windows, shading his eyes against the misty glare. He was again aware of his own resentment, his reluctance at being here, knowing the situation would require all the diplomacy and pomp he was not in the mood to offer. It had already begun with the regular crash of salutes, gun for gun with the nearest shore battery, above which the Union Flag did not even ripple in the humid air. He saw the guardboat riding above her own reflection, her oars stilled as the officer in charge waited for the two-decker to anchor. Without being up there on the poop or quarterdeck Bolitho could visualise it all, the men at braces and halliards, others strung out along the great yards ready to fist and furl the sails neatly into place, so that from the land it would look as if every stitch of canvas had vanished to the touch of a single hand. Land. To a sailor it was always a dream. A new adventure. Bolitho glanced at the dress coat which hung across a chair-back, ready for the call to commence his act. When he had been given command of Sparrow all those years ago he would never have believed it possible. Death by accident or in the cannon’s mouth, disgrace, or the lack of opportunity to distinguish yourself or gain an admiral’s favour, made any promotion a hard climb. Now the coat was a reality, bearing its twin gold epaulettes with their paired silver stars. And yet . . . He reached up to brush the loose lock of hair from above his right eye. Like the scar running deep into his hairline where a cutlass had nearly ended his life, nothing changed, not even uncertainty. He had believed that he might be able to grow into it, even though the step from command to flag rank was the greatest stride of all. Sir Richard Bolitho, Knight of the Bath, Vice-Admiral of the
 Red, and next to Nelson the youngest on the List. He gave a brief smile. The King had not even remembered his name when he had knighted him. Bolitho had also managed to accept that he was no longer involved with the day-to-day running of a ship, any ship which flew his flag. As a lieutenant he had often glanced aft at the captain’s remote figure, and had felt awe, if not always respect. Then as a captain himself he had so often lain awake, fretting, as he listened to the wind and shipboard noises, restraining himself from dashing on deck when he thought the officer of the watch was not aware of the dangers around him. It was hard to delegate; but at least the ship had been his. To the ship’s company of any man-of-war their captain was next only to God, and some said uncharitably that that was only due to seniority. As a flag officer you had to stay aloof and direct the affairs of all your captains and commanders, place whatever forces you controlled where they would serve to the best effect. The power was greater, but so too was the responsibility. Few flag officers had ever allowed themselves to forget that Admiral Byng had been shot for cowardice by a firing party on the deck of his own flagship. Perhaps he would have settled down to both his rank and unfamiliar title but for his personal life. He shied away from the thought and moved his fingers to his left eye. He massaged the lid and then stared hard at the drifting green bank of land. Sharp and clear again. But it would not last. The surgeon in London had warned him. He needed rest, more treatment, regular care. It would have meant remaining ashore—worse than that, an appointment at the Admiralty. So why had he asked, almost demanded, another appointment with the fleet? Anywhere, or so it had sounded at the time to the Lords of Admiralty. Three of his superiors there had told him that he had more than earned a London appointment even before his last great victory. Yet when he had persisted, Bolitho had had the feeling they were equally glad he had declined their offers. Fate—it must be that. He turned and looked deep into the great cabin. The low, white deckhead, the pale green leather of the chairs, the screen doors which led to the sleeping quarters or to the teeming world of the ship beyond, where a sentry guarded his privacy around the clock. Hyperion— it had to be an act of Fate. He could recall the last time he had seen her, after he had worked her into Plymouth. The staring crowds who had thronged the waterfront and Hoe to watch the victor returning home. So many killed, so many more crippled for life after their triumph over Lequiller’s squadron in Biscay, and the capture of his great hundred-gun flagship Tornade which Bolitho was later to command as another admiral’s flag captain. But it was this ship which he always remembered. Hyperion, seventy-four. He had walked beside the dock in Plymouth on that awful day when he had said his last farewell; or so he had believed. Battered and ripped open by shot, her rigging and sails flayed to pieces, her splintered decks darkly stained with the blood of those who had fought. They said she would never stand in the line of battle again. There had been many moments while they had struggled back to port in foul weather when he had thought she would sink like some of her adversaries. As he had stood looking at her in the dock he had almost wished that she had found peace on the seabed. With the war growing and spreading, Hyperion had been made into a stores hulk. Mastless, her once-busy gundecks packed with casks and crates, she had become just a part of the dockyard. She was the first ship of the line Bolitho had ever commanded. Then, as now, he remained a frigate-man at heart, and the idea of being captain of a two-decker had appalled him. But then, too, he had been desperate, although for different reasons. Plagued by the fever which had nearly killed him in the Great South Sea, he was employed ashore at the Nore, recruiting, as the French Revolution swept across the continent like a forest fire. He could recall joining this ship at Gibraltar as if it was yesterday. She had been old and tired and yet she had taken him to her, as if in some way they needed each other. Bolitho heard the trill of calls, the great splash as the anchor plummeted down into the waters he knew so well. His flag captain would come to see him very soon now for orders. Try as he might, Bolitho could not see Captain Edmund Haven as an inspiring leader or his personal adviser. A colourless, impersonal sort of man, and yet even as he considered Haven he knew he was being unfair. Bolitho had joined the ship just days before they had weighed for the passage to the Indies. And in the thirty which had followed, Bolitho had stayed almost completely isolated in his own quarters, so that even Allday, his coxswain, was showing signs of concern. It was probably something Haven had said on their first tour of the ship, the day before they had put to sea. Haven had obviously thought it odd, eccentric perhaps, that his admiral should wish to see anything beyond his cabin or the poop, let alone show interest in the gundecks and orlop. Bolitho’s glance rested on the sword rack beside the screen. His own old sword, and the fine presentation one. How could Haven have understood? It was not his fault. Bolitho had taken his apparent dissatisfaction with his command like a personal insult. He had snapped, “This ship may be old, Captain Haven, but she has out-sailed many far younger! The Chesapeake, the Saintes, Toulon and Biscay—her battle honours read like a history of the navy itself!” It was unfair, but Haven should have known better. Every yard of that tour had been a rebirth of memory. Only the faces and voices did not fit. But the ship was the same. New masts, and most of her armament replaced by heavier artillery than when she had faced the broadsides of Lequiller’s Tornade, gleaming paint and neatly tarred seams; nothing could disguise his Hyperion. He stared round the cabin, seeing it as before. And she was thirty-two years old. When she had been built at Deptford she had had the pick of Kentish oak. Those days of shipbuilding were gone forever, and now most forests had been stripped of their best timber to feed the needs of the fleet. It was ironic that the great Tornade had been a new ship, yet she had been paid off as a prison hulk some four years back. He felt his left eye again and cursed wretchedly as the mist seemed to drift across it. He thought of Haven and the others who served this old ship day and night. Did they know or guess that the man whose flag flew from the foremast truck was partially blind in his left eye? Bolitho clenched his fists as he relived that moment, falling to the deck, blinded by sand from the bucket an enemy ball had blasted apart. He waited for his composure to return. No, Haven did not seem to notice anything beyond his duties. Bolitho touched one of the chairs and pictured the length and breadth of his flagship. So much of him was in her. His brother had died on the upper deck, had fallen to save his only son Adam, although the boy had been unaware that he was still alive, at the time. And dear Inch who had risen to become Hyperion’s first lieutenant. He could see him now, with his anxious, horse-faced grin. Now he too was dead, with so many of their “happy few.” And Cheney had also walked these decks—he pushed the chair aside and crossed angrily to the open stern windows. “You called, Sir Richard?” It was Ozzard, his mole-like servant. It would be no ship at all without him. Bolitho turned. He must have spoken her name aloud. How many times; and how long would he suffer like this? He said, “I—I am sorry, Ozzard.” He did not go on. Ozzard folded his paw-like hands under his apron and looked at the glittering anchorage. “Old times, Sir Richard.” “Aye.” Bolitho sighed. “We had better be about it, eh?” Ozzard held up the heavy coat with its shining epaulettes. Beyond the screen door Bolitho heard the trill of more calls and the squeak of tackles as boats were swayed out for lowering alongside. Landfall. Once it had been such a magic word. Ozzard busied himself with the coat but did not bring either sword from the rack. He and Allday were great friends even though most people would see them as chalk and cheese. And Allday would not allow anyone but himself to clip on the sword. Like the old ship, Bolitho thought, Allday was of the best English oak, and when he was gone none would take his place. He imagined that Ozzard was dismayed that he had chosen the two-decker when he could have had the pick of any first-rate he wanted. At the Admiralty they had gently suggested that although Hyperion was ready for sea again, after a three-year overhaul and refit she might never recover from that last savage battle. Curiously it had been Nelson, the hero whom Bolitho had never met, who had settled the matter. Someone at the Admiralty must have written to the little admiral to tell him of Bolitho’s request. Nelson had sent his own views in a despatch to Their Lordships with typical brevity. Give Bolitho any ship he wants. He is a sailor, not a landsman. It would amuse Our Nel, Bolitho thought. Hyperion had been set aside as a hulk until her recommissioning just a few months ago, and she was thirty-two years old. Nelson had hoisted his own flag in Victory, a first-rate, but he had found her himself rotting as a prison hulk. He had known in his strange fashion that he had to have her as his flagship. As far as he could recall, Bolitho knew that Victory was eight years older than Hyperion. Somehow it seemed right that the two old ships should live again, having been discarded without much thought after all they had done. The outer screen door opened and Daniel Yovell, Bolitho’s secretary, stood watching him glumly. Bolitho relented
 yet again. It had been easy for none of them because of his moods, his uncertainties. Even Yovell, plump, round-shouldered and so painstaking with his work, had been careful to keep his distance for the past thirty days at sea. “The Captain will be here shortly, Sir Richard.” Bolitho slipped his arms into the coat and shrugged himself into the most comfortable position without making his spine prickle with sweat. “Where is my flag lieutenant?” Bolitho smiled suddenly. Having an official aide had also been hard to accept at the beginning. Now, after two previous flag lieutenants, he found it simple to face. “Waiting for the barge. After that,” the fat shoulders rose cheerfully, “you will meet the local dignitaries.” He had taken Bolitho’s smile as a return to better things. Yovell’s simple Devonian mind required everything to remain safely the same. Bolitho allowed Ozzard to stand on tip-toe to adjust his neck-cloth. For years he had always hung upon the word of admiralty or the senior officer present wherever it happened to be. It was still difficult to believe that this time there was no superior brain to question or satisfy. He was the senior officer. Of course in the end the unwritten naval rule would prevail. If right, others would take the credit. If wrong, he might well carry the blame. Bolitho glanced at himself in the mirror and grimaced. His hair was still black, apart from some distasteful silver ones in the rebellious lock of hair covering the old scar. The lines at the corners of his mouth were deeper, and his reflection reminded him of the picture of his older brother, Hugh, which hung in Falmouth. Like so many of those Bolitho portraits in the great grey stone house. He controlled his sudden despair. Now, apart from his loyal steward Ferguson and the servants, it was empty. I am here. It is what I wanted. He glanced around the cabin again. Hyperion. We nearly died together. Yovell turned aside, his apple-red face wary. “The Captain, Sir Richard.” Haven entered, his hat beneath one arm. “The ship is secured, sir.” Bolitho nodded. He had told Haven not to address him by his title unless ceremony dictated otherwise. The division between them was already great enough. “I shall come up.” A shadow moved through the door and Bolitho noticed just the briefest touch of annoyance on Haven’s face. That was an improvement from total self-composure, he thought. Allday walked past the flag captain. “The barge is alongside, Sir Richard.” He moved to the sword rack and eyed the two weapons thoughtfully. “The proper one today?” Bolitho smiled. Allday had problems of his own, but he would keep them to himself until he was ready. Coxswain? A true friend was a better description. It certainly made Haven frown that one so lowly could come and go as he pleased. Allday stooped to clip the old Bolitho sword to the belt. The leather scabbard had been rebuilt several times, but the tarnished hilt remained the same, and the keen, outmoded blade was as sharp as ever. Bolitho patted the sword against his hip. “Another good friend.” Their eyes met. It was almost physical, Bolitho thought. All the influence his rank invited was nothing compared with their close bond. Haven was of medium build, almost stocky, with curling ginger hair. In his early thirties, he had the look of a sound lawyer or city merchant, and his expression today was quietly expectant, giving nothing away. Bolitho had visited his cabin on one occasion and had remarked on a small portrait, of a beautiful girl with streaming hair, surrounded by flowers. “My wife,” Haven had replied. His tone had suggested that he would say no more even to his admiral. A strange creature, Bolitho thought; but the ship was smartly run, although with so many new hands and an overload of landsmen, it had appeared as if the first lieutenant could take much of the credit for it. Bolitho strode through the door, past the rigid Royal Marine sentry and into the glaring sunlight. It was strange to see the wheel lashed in the midships position and abandoned. Every day at sea Bolitho had taken his solitary walks on the windward side of the quarterdeck or poop, had studied the small convoy and one attendant frigate, while his feet had taken him up and down the worn planks, skirting gun tackles and ringbolts without any conscious thought. Eyes watched him pass, quickly averted if he glanced towards them. It was something he accepted. He knew he would never grow to like it. Now the ship lay at rest; lines were being flaked down, petty officers moved watchfully between the bare-backed seamen to make sure the ship, no longer an ordinary man-of-war but an admiral’s flagship, was as smart as could be expected anywhere. Bolitho looked aloft at the black criss-cross of shrouds and rigging, the tightly furled sails, and shortened figures busily working high above the decks to make certain all was secure there too. Some of the lieutenants moved away as he walked to the quarterdeck to look down at the lines of eighteen-pounders which had replaced the original batteries of twelve-pounders. Faces floated through the busy figures. Like ghosts. Noises intruded above the shouted orders and the clatter of tackles. Decks torn by shot as if ripped by giant claws. Men falling and dying, reaching for aid when there was none. His nephew Adam, then fourteen years old, white-faced and yet wildly determined as the embattled ships had ground together for the last embrace from which there was no escape for either of them. Haven said, “The guardboat is alongside, sir.” Bolitho gestured past him. “You have not rigged winds’ls, Captain.” Why could he not bring himself to call Haven by his first name? What is happening to me? Haven shrugged. “They are unsightly from the shore, sir.” Bolitho looked at him. “They give some air to the people on the gundecks. Have them rigged.” He tried to contain his annoyance, at himself, and with Haven for not thinking of the furnace heat on an overcrowded gundeck. Hyperion was one hundred and eighty feet long on her gundeck, and carried a total company of some six hundred officers, seamen and marines. In this heat it would feel like twice that number. He saw Haven snapping his orders to his first lieutenant, the latter glancing towards him as if to see for himself the reason for the rigging of windsails. The first lieutenant was another odd bird, Bolitho had decided. He was over thirty, old for his rank, and had been commander of a brig. The appointment had not been continued when the vessel had been paid off, and he had been returned to his old rank. He was tall, and unlike his captain, a man of outward excitement and enthusiasm. Tall and darkly handsome, his gipsy good looks reminded Bolitho of a face in the past, but he could not recall whose. He had a ready grin, and was obviously popular with his subordinates, the sort of officer the midshipmen would love to emulate. Bolitho looked forward, below the finely curved beakhead where he could see the broad shoulders of the figurehead. It was what he had always remembered most when he had left the ship at Plymouth. Hyperion had been so broken and damaged it had been hard to see her as she had once been. The figurehead had told another story. Under the gilt paint it may have been scarred too, but the piercing blue eyes which stared straight ahead from beneath the crown of a rising sun were as arrogant as ever. One out-thrust, muscled arm pointed the same trident towards the next horizon. Even seen from aft, Bolitho gained strength from the old familiarity. Hyperion, one of the Titans, had overthrown the indignity of being denigrated to a hulk. Allday watched him narrowly. He had seen the gaze, and guessed what it meant. Bolitho was all aback. Allday was still not sure if he agreed with him or not. But he loved Bolitho like no other being and would die for him without question. He said, “Barge is ready, Sir Richard.” He wanted to add that it was not much of a crew. Yet. Bolitho walked slowly to the entry port and glanced down at the boat alongside. Jenour, his new flag lieutenant, was already aboard; so was Yovell, a case of documents clasped across his fat knees. One of the midshipmen stood like a ramrod in the stern-sheets. Bolitho checked himself from scanning the youthful features. It was all past. He knew nobody in this ship. He looked round suddenly and saw the fifers moistening their pipes on their lips, the Royal Marines gripping their pipeclayed musket slings, ready to usher him over the side. Haven and his first lieutenant, all the other anonymous faces, the blues and whites of the officers, the scarlet of the marines, the tanned bodies of the watching seamen. He wanted to say to them, “I am your flag officer, but Hyperion is still my ship!” He heard Allday climb down to the barge and knew, no matter how he pretended otherwise, he would be watching, ready to reach out and catch him if his eye clouded over and he lost his step. Bolitho raised his hat, and instantly the fifes and drums snapped into a lively crescendo, and the Royal Marine guard presented arms as their major’s sword flashed in salute. Calls trilled and Bolitho lowered himself down the

Kent, Alexander (2000-03-31T23:58:59). Honour This Day: The Richard Bolitho Novels (The Bolitho Novels Book 17) (Kindle Locations 151-426). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

Asplinter of wood pierced Mary Elizabeth Chapman’s thumb as she crept behind her lifelong friend Dorothy Raynsford. Resisting the urge to cry out, she stuck the offending appendage in her mouth and tasted blood. Adults weren’t supposed to sneak around in the rafters. Why she ever agreed to follow her friend on this escapade, she’d never know. Well, she did know. She was as curious as Dorothy, just not as brave. The thought of the elders below hearing and catching them? It was enough to make Mary Elizabeth want to faint. But she pressed on behind her bold friend and crawled like a small child up in the attic of the meeting room. The smell of hay filled her nose as fear crept up her throat. This meeting would decide her people’s fate. And Mary Elizabeth wasn’t sure she was prepared to hear the answers. Dorothy stopped a few feet ahead of her and laid flat on her stomach, peeking over the edge of the rafters. Placing a finger over her lips, she waved to Mary Elizabeth. As Mary Elizabeth reached the lookout spot, voices from the room below became clearer. Pastor John Robinson spoke to a room full of their congregation’s elders. “It’s clear that the time has come. With the patent from the Virginia Company for a colony, and with the investments of the Merchants and Adventurers, I believe a small contingent can go on ahead and begin the settlement. Within a few years, we should have our whole congregation there and our debts to the investors for the trip paid in full.” Murmurs resounded throughout the room. “Can these Strangers be trusted?” A voice from the back put words to Mary Elizabeth’s own thoughts. She’d grown up with the stories of how their congregation had fled England and King James’ religious persecution. The first attempt had been thwarted by a ship’s captain who swindled all the passengers and turned them in to the King’s sheriffs. When they tried again, a number of families were separated for a year as one ship deserted them, leaving many behind. But that hadn’t deterred them. Eventually, they’d all made it to Holland. Labeled as Separatists because they wanted to separate themselves from the Church of England—which didn’t exactly please the King since he was the “head” of the church—everyone outside of their small group became known as Strangers. Their longing not to abide by the church produced persecution they endured and that was almost as bad as when Bloody Mary reigned. It was no wonder several folks voiced their concerns about trust this evening. Twelve years had passed, and here they were again. Discussing a way to leave. This time, not so much to flee persecution, but to secure a better future. The memories of dishonest people, though, were still fresh to all who remembered. No one wanted to go through those atrocities again. They’d lost everything. Pastor Robinson spoke in a soothing tone. “While no man is without sin, I do believe we can trust them. The investment is sound, and the contracts are binding. We all know the worries that have arisen. It’s getting harder to make a living, and our children are being influenced too much by the culture around them. Sin and evil abound. If we stay, we risk losing the future generations to a dangerous course.” Nods accompanied many affirmations. Mary Elizabeth tuned out the conversation. How would they even survive? Stories of tragedy abounded for those who had ventured across the ocean. And to start a whole new colony? There wouldn’t be stores or supplies or…anything. A shiver raced up her spine. Even though they were often looked down upon by the Dutch because they were outsiders and resolved to live out their faith in ways that went against the norm, she’d felt at home in Leyden. To be honest, it was the only home she remembered. But her people had worked menial jobs and longer hours to support their families, and times were getting tougher. A poke to her shoulder made her look at Dorothy. Her friend’s face lit up in an exuberant smile. She raised her eyebrows. “Can you imagine the adventure?” The words floated toward Mary Elizabeth in a soft whisper. “What?” Had she missed something important? Their pastor’s voice echoed through the room. “It’s decided then. We have chosen the first group to go.” As they waited for the room to clear, Dorothy filled her in on the families who would venture to the New World. Dorothy’s family—which made her even more animated than usual as she talked with her hands—and the Chapmans, Mary Elizabeth’s family, were part of the group. Mary Elizabeth went numb. She didn’t register anything more that Dorothy said. Even as they walked home, her heart couldn’t make any sense out of the jumble of words. Dorothy must have recognized something was wrong and followed Mary Elizabeth home. “Mary Elizabeth. What is going on in that head of yours?” Lifting the latch to the door of her home, Mary Elizabeth clamped her mouth shut. “Don’t shut me out. Aren’t you excited about all this?” She turned and stared at her friend’s eyes. Eyes that sparkled with excitement and joy. Why couldn’t she feel that way? Dorothy’s warm hand reached out and covered her own. “Come. Let’s get some tea and discuss what you’re thinking. My parents aren’t expecting me home—I told them I was staying over with you—and as long as I am there to milk Polly in the morning and feed the chickens, I should be able to stay as long as you need me.”

Woodhouse, Kimberley (2018-01-31T22:58:59). The Mayflower Bride: Daughters of the Mayflower (book 1) (Kindle Locations 220-265). Barbour Publishing, Inc.. Kindle Edition. 

“Why? Why didn’t you stop him?” I scream at the man standing in front of me. The Sea God, the one who could have stopped all this with a wave of his hand. The thoughts of what just happened fly through my mind. I have no idea if the rest of them escaped. My family, my pirates, and everyone I have ever cared about could be stuck in that castle. “Even gods cannot stop their children. Only guide them and hope,” he says, folding his hands. You wouldn’t think he was a powerful god from his torn clothes and scraggy beard. I wouldn’t have thought he was anything but an old man, if I hadn’t seen him save me.   “You gave him those powers! You let him keep that crown!” I shout, stepping closer as my own powers call for me to use them. I glance up at the top of the cave, seeing the water swirling and the sky just visible above. We are in the middle of the Storm Sea, the sea he saved me from when no one else could. “I also gave you your powers. I also saved your life and brought you here,” he responds. “You want a deal? A deal between us?” I ask. I think back to every night for months that he has whispered the same thing to me, the same promise of a future after everything.   “Yes. It is the only way to save those you love,” he says, a sharp pain shooting through my heart at the thought of my pirates, my chosen.   “Tell me the riddle once more, the deal you told me once,” I request, knowing I need to hear it again before agreeing to it. “A deal is sought after, a deal will be made. The price is clear, the truth will not be forbidding.   The true heir of both water and land must take the throne.   The fire-touched king must fall at the hands of the water-touched pirate. Changed ones must never have the throne and only a changed one can give the crown to the new queen. The crown needed to win, can only be found where life lives within water. Only ice will bring the map, if she does not fall. If the deal is not agreed, then the sea will never be saved.” He says each word with power. The words surround my memory and I know there are a lot of demands in that riddle. If I even get one wrong, then I could lose everything. They say the Sea God is the master of tricks, as well as the sea.   “This is the only way,” he tells me gently as I walk over to him. “Call my dragon here, let her take me away, and I will agree to this deal,” I tell him, knowing that the only way I’m getting out of this cave is with help. My pirates can’t help me now, but I

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 168-194). Kindle Edition. 

need to save them. I need to save the sea. “The deal is made,” the Sea God says, his gold hair lifting like there is a breeze. Then, my dragon’s roar sounds through the cave.

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 194-196). Kindle Edition. 

“My changed one, the one I chose to win. The only one who can win,” a voice whispers into my ear as I try to open my eyes and can’t. I try to move my body, but it feels like something is weighing me down. I feel like I’m underwater, but instead of the weightless feeling, I feel like I’m being smothered. “Don’t move, don’t fight him yet. It isn’t time, my changed one, but know I’m here. I’m watching you,” the voice whispers. Then it feels like a wave of water pushes into me and everything seems to float away with me. “Cassandra, wake up, now,” a voice urgently whispers to me, her voice getting louder every time she repeats the sentence. I blink my eyes open and feel a bitter cold wood floor against my cheek. The freezing room is all I can feel for a while, as well as the endless darkness of the room. There’s nothing to see, other than the wood floor, and nothing to hear but the sound of water slamming against the side of a ship in the distance. The floor is slightly damp, and I shiver as I lift my head up. It’s so cold that when I lick my dry lips, I feel like my tongue could stick to them. I lift my hand, moving away my wet hair sticking to the side of my face.   I reach a hand up, feeling the lump and the cut on the side of my head and the dried blood stuck to the side of my face. “Who’s there?” I ask into the darkness. The room is so dark that I can’t see anything, only smell the dampness and hear water splashing in the distance. I know I’m on a ship, but it can’t be my ship. I can’t be with my pirates because they wouldn’t leave me in here. I sit back, crossing my legs as I think about everything that happened. I can remember the guard who took me. I remember trying to save Livvy and failing. Instead, we were both taken.   I feel down my outfit, knowing it’s the same clothes as the day I was taken, and I feel my necklace around my neck. I hold it tight, remembering Chaz and the moment he gave it to me. The memory gives me a little strength, just enough to take a deep breath and try not to panic. I know where I’m going, who I am being taken to. It’s funny how I spent my whole life running from the King, worrying that one day he would find out about me and kill me. I’ve survived eighteen years in a life I shouldn’t have had. I should be happy, but all I feel is regret. Regret that I didn’t tell each one of my pirates how I truly feel about them. Regret that I didn’t get a chance to really live my life with them. I was free with them, with my pirates, when I was so lost before. But now, I feel more than lost; I feel hopeless. A memory of Hunter and the protective look he gave me as I was taken flashes into my mind. His dark eyes

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 208-229). Kindle Edition. 

burned as if the very ship he stood on could sink, but he would only look at me. He didn’t look away once, even when his eyes showed me fear. Fear of losing me, fear I thought I would never see in my dark pirate’s eyes. “It’s Livvy,” she tells me, and I turn my head in the direction of her voice. Livvy, the girl I rescued who only wanted a normal life. Livvy who is brave, smart, and yet, had given up the moment her parents sold her. I thought I saw some hope in her eyes on the ship, a chance for a real life, but the tone of her voice tells me she has completely given up now. I won’t give up, despite being away from the only life I have ever wanted. A life with my pirates who I could never imagine leaving, and yet here I am, far from them. “Are we on the guards’ ship?” I ask her. I hear footsteps before a hand touches my shoulder. I grab Livvy’s hand and move closer, only to be stopped by bars and chains wrapped around my right ankle. I reach down and feel the small metal bar around my ankle and the thick chains leading off it, which must be connected to the wall of the ship.   The bars between Livvy and me aren’t thick, and they are spaced far enough apart that I might even be able to push myself through them, but I don’t. It’s not worth a beating from the guards if they found me trying to move into another cage. They might think I’m trying to escape and I need to be awake to work out a way to get us out of this mess. “Yes. I woke up yesterday and I’ve not seen anyone. I have your egg,” she tells me gently, but it doesn’t mask how frightened she is. I can hear it in her voice, the way it cracks at the end of each word, and the shiver I can feel from her hands. I wish I could tell her not to be frightened, that everything will be good in the end, but I’m no liar. I won’t lie to her and I doubt she would believe me anyway. I try to think of something to say, the silence between us stretching out for a while before my stomach grumbles and I realise that I’m really hungry, hungrier than I have ever been. “I’m starving. We must have been sleeping for a while to feel as weak as I do,” I comment, just as the room shakes and I fly across to the wall. The chains pull on my foot as I slam into the wall of the ship and I scream out from the pain in my ankle, the cold metal cutting into my skin. I quickly scramble back, getting closer to the middle of the cage again, and the pressure of the chain disappears. The sound of harsh water hitting the side of the ship is louder for a second and the wood in the ship groans. I jump when something loud smacks the side of the ship and I pray it’s not a rock. I don’t want to be chained down here if this ship sinks in the Storm Sea. “Yes,” is all Livvy says into the darkness as the ship settles again. I glance down at my hands and, even though I can’t see them, I can feel how wet they are. I remember the water falling out of my hands after what happened with Ryland. I don’t know exactly what happened, but I know the water came from me. They say the changed ones have powers. Is this my power? “My pirates will come after us,”   I whisper, only my words sound more like a hope than a promise. It’s all I have, the hope, the promise

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 229-255). Kindle Edition. 

that they will follow me. That they care enough to. “After you. They will save you and I know they only took me on board because they love you. It’s always been about you and I’m nothing to them,”   she says, a sob following her words. “That’s not -,” I try to comfort her, but she stops me. “Don’t. I’m not a child. I know how they feel about you and that I am nothing,”   she interrupts me with her harsh words. I pull myself up to my feet and walk towards her voice, stopping when I hit the metal bars of the cage we are in. Livvy’s hand snakes out from the bars and wraps around mine. “I won’t let anyone hurt you, Livvy. I saved you once, remember?”   I whisper, holding onto her hand tighter. “You said then that I couldn’t save you and I proved you wrong. Please trust in me one more time. Don’t give up hope,” I plead. “We are going to the King, to his court where it’s rumoured that nightmares come true,” she says, and I know she is right. Everything my father told me about his court, about the King, doesn’t put him in a good light. The very fact he hunts my kind and has them killed as babies, makes me frightened of him, but I’m not going to let that fear control me. If I’m going to be killed, I’m going to fight to the very end and never show him the fear I know he will want. I don’t want to confirm her fears; there is no point. “Where’s the egg?” I ask Livvy. She grabs my hand, placing it on the warm dragon egg shell. “It’s cracking, it has been for… I don’t know how long, but since I woke up. I think it had been thrown around this cage until I woke up as I wasn’t holding it,” Livvy tells me, and I feel what she does, a shake of the egg and a cracking noise. I hold my hand still, wishing with every part of me that Livvy and the dragon egg weren’t here. They are both too young, too weak to survive what will come next, and what's even worse, I don’t know how to protect them. The king will use Livvy against me, or worse, just kill her as she is nothing to him. I don’t know what he will do with my dragon, but I imagine a dragon is useful to a king. “If you get a chance to run, if I get you one, run and don’t look back. Do you understand me, Livvy?” I ask her, trying to think of a plan. When we get out of here and on the deck, I might be able to make a distraction. Find a way to get out of this. If not for me, for them. My dragon cannot be born into a world of nightmares, and Livvy doesn’t deserve to die there. “Yes,” she whispers, and I rest my head against the cold bars as I think back to my pirates and hope they are on their way. I repeat their names over and over in my mind, along with how I feel about each one of them. The feelings are the same, a feeling that makes my heart pound faster in my chest and a warmth fill me, even in this cold place. Dante. Ryland. Hunter. Jacob. Chaz. Zack. Every single one of them. I can’t deny how I feel for them or what I would do to save them. I lift my hand to my forehead, feeling my mark and wondering what happened with Ryland. Will sharing a mark make him safe or put him in more

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 255-282). Kindle Edition. 

danger? I close my eyes, thinking of Ryland, and I feel something, a little spark of warmth. It’s a bond I can’t explain, but I feel connected to him. I can feel he’s alive, but not where he is. We are bonded in some way now, and I don’t know what way. I hate that I don’t know enough, that everyone in this world seems to know more than I do. I sit back, a frustrated sigh leaving my lips, and try to think of something else. I try to think of my pirates. Part of me wants them to come after me, to save me, but a bigger part of me hopes they never do. I couldn’t live with myself if something happened to them. If I save myself, then they won’t need to come. I could find them. I could never stay away from my pirates, even if I tried.

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 282-288). Kindle Edition. 

“Livvy.” I tap her shoulder, as little bits of light shine through the cracks of the ceiling and the door that I can now see on the other side of the room. There are a few steps leading up to the door, but not much else in here, just the cage we are in and one crate strapped to the wall. It’s the bottom of the ship. The water must be calmer today, because the ship is only moving slightly from side to side, nothing like it was last night. I couldn’t sleep because I couldn’t stop the thoughts going through my head, thoughts of escape, thoughts of what my near future will hold. “It’s morning then?” she mumbles, and I look down at the egg in her arms as it starts shaking more than ever before. I smooth my hand over the shiny blue shell, the white dots crackling under my hand and tiny bits falling off onto the floor. I wish I could let my dragon be born anywhere other than here. But wishing is not going to get me anywhere. “It’s hatching,” Livvy mumbles. “If I die soon, at least I will get to see the birth of a dragon. That’s something rare.” Her tone is devoid of all hope, of all wonder and life, like the voice I have gotten used to listening to. “You won’t die,” I tell her, but I don’t take my eyes off the egg as bits of the shell break off and fall away. We go silent, only the sounds of the water outside and our heavy breathing audible as the final bits of the eggshell break away and the white head of a baby dragon appears. The dragon uses its wings to crawl out from the shell, and I hold a hand out, watching as it pushes its tiny head against my hand. The dragon is all white, except for little blue scales on its belly and a blue mark under its right eye. It has a long neck and massive eyes that stand out on its thin face. It has folded-down ears, and its long, white wings spread out slowly as I watch in awe. “Beautiful,” I whisper, because that’s the only word to describe the sight in front of me. I thought I’d never get a chance to live a real life, that I would be killed. Yet, here I am. A baby being born, even a dragon baby, is the most beautiful thing in the world. The dragon tilts its head to the side, its eyes never leaving mine, and it slowly lowers its head. I think the dragon is bowing, but I’m not sure. “She is,” Livvy says, her voice full of awe like mine. “She?” I ask, not knowing how to tell and wondering how she did. “Yes, she. I read a book on dragons with Roger on the ship, and only female dragons can be white or light colours.” “Roger and you seemed to get close, before -,” I stop when she sharply looks away. “You should know as well as I do that feelings

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 300-323). Kindle Edition. 

will not save you,” she snaps, glaring over at me and then looking away once more. I stare at her for a while, seeing a girl full of hate for the situation she is in and disbelief that anything could go well in her life. I guess I was like that once, before I escaped Onaya and my pirates saved me. “At least we know that the dragon is a she. We need to know for when we pick a name,” I say, watching as the dragon curls up on Livvy’s lap as she pushes the bits of egg away. The bottom of the egg drops to the floor, the water from inside it falling on the ground. I rest my hand on the dragon’s back and she lifts her head, resting it on my hand before falling to sleep. “Why choose a name? The moment they let us out and see we have the dragon, they will give her to the king,” Livvy asks me. “No, they won’t. I will create a distraction somehow and you need to throw her into the sea,” I tell Livvy, whose eyes widen as she shakes her head. “They will beat you for that and she might not survive anyway. They would kill me for that. I’m nothing,” she says, looking away from me. “She has a better chance in the sea than with the king,” I say firmly. I refuse to let him have my dragon. “Livvy, please do this for me. For her,” I beg, and she finally looks up. We both stare at each other for a long time. “Name?” Livvy asks, not telling me what she is thinking or if she is going to help me. I look down at the small dragon, knowing the only name to give her. “Vivo. It means ‘to survive’ in the old language I studied a little back home,” I whisper, and Vivo lifts her head, looking at me through sleepy eyes. “Vivo, don’t forget me when you escape. But live, have a life and I promise we will meet again one day.” I have no idea if she can understand me or if I’m making little sense to her, but there’s intelligence in her eyes. I have to hope she does understand. “Vivo… I like it,” Livvy says, only seconds before we feel the ship stop and I try to swallow the fear I feel. I stand up after gently moving my hand, and walk to the edge of the cage to wait for them to come for us. * * * It doesn’t take long for the guards to open the door and walk down the steps. I look quickly at Livvy, who pushes Vivo down her top, hiding her and then pushing the remains of the egg into the corner. The guards have dark green uniforms, a dragon symbol on the breastplates, silver helmets that cover their faces so you can’t see what they really look like, and large heavy boots that pound against the floor with every step. I try to quickly search the guard heading towards my cage for weapons, seeing a large sword tied to his back and knifes in holders on his thighs. It looks like there might be more weapons hidden in his uniform, but my best bet is the knifes. I stay still as they unlock the cage doors, unlock our cuffs, and drag us out of the cages. “Behave. I don’t want to have to handcuff you,” my guard growls at me when I try to pull my arm out of his tight grip. He tightens his grip on

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 323-352). Kindle Edition. 

my arm, squeezing so tight that it brings tears to my eyes, and I bite my lip to hold in a scream. “Fine,” I pant out. He loosens his grip and I take a deep breath, still feeling the pain and no doubt marks from where he grabbed me. “Leave the egg here. We can take it to him later when he is done with this one,” the guard tells the other as he goes to walk into the cage, holding Livvy tightly in his grip. The other guard nods and Livvy is dragged behind me, but she doesn’t resist, just holds a hand over her chest where Vivo is hidden. The guard pulls me up the steps, and I try not to trip as he walks quickly towards the open door to the outside. The light burns my eyes for a long time when we get out to the top of the ship, so I lift my free arm to hold it over my eyes as they adjust. When I can finally see a little better, I look up at the giant cliff and the massive castle that sits on the edge of it. The cliff winds down to a garden full of cut bushes in the shape of a massive maze. Further in front of that are open green fields that lead to the docks the ship has pulled into. I look over at the Storm Sea, seeing the giant waves that crash against the rocks and the fierceness of them. “The King wants the changed one sent straight to him. He doesn’t care what you do with the other,” a guard says to the one holding me. “Send the other one to the dungeons and I will personally take the changed one to the king,” the guard holding me tells him. I take a quick look around at the ship, seeing the large green sails of our ship and the three ships docked next to ours, all guard ships. Everything on the ship is shiny and clean, and the guards are rushing off the ship carrying boxes and ropes. We stand quietly as all the guards, other than the two holding me, leave the ship. There are two guards in front of me, one on each side of the panel of wood leading to the stone dock. Time for a distraction. I look down at my hands, seeing no water this time and as hard as I try to make water appear, it doesn’t. I try to think of Ryland, but he feels too far away, like I can almost sense where he is, but he’s behind me, through the Storm Sea. I wonder if my power had something to do with Ryland. That would make sense, considering nothing ever happened before we touched and he got my mark. The guard tightens his grip on my arm and drags me towards the exit off the ship and I dig my feet in. “Don’t mess around. We have been good to you,” the guard huffs, looking down at me, but he doesn’t hurt me this time. “Kidnapping isn’t what I would call good,” I spit out, still trying to pull away from him. He lets out a long, gruff laugh. “These men haven’t seen a woman in months, and both of you are very pretty, with pretty bodies and innocent faces. We were good. We paid the guards outside your doors to stop anyone from really hurting you,” he tells me, pulling me closer to him until I can’t look anywhere except into his face. “But you’re not really that innocent, are you?” he asks. I slap him hard across the face and his head snaps to the side. He yanks me closer, so my face is next to his, and I’m forced to smell how disgusting he smells as his horrible breath creeps down the

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 352-377). Kindle Edition. 

side of my face. “Or we could go back down there and you could show me a good time?” he suggests, letting me go and stepping away. I smile sweetly, moving closer to him and watching the shock appear on his face. “Never,” I whisper, and pull my knee up between his legs and he drops to the ground with a groan. I don’t waste any time as I turn around and run straight at the guard holding Livvy. He goes to punch me, but I duck, punching him in his stomach and tackling him to the ground. I land on top of the guard lifting my hand to try to punch him, but he grabs my hand and makes me scream as he pushes me off him. “Stop her!” I hear someone shout as the guard grabs hold of my wrists and pins me down on the deck of the ship. I watch as Livvy throws Vivo into the sea, just before a guard grabs her by her hair and she screams as he drags her away from the edge. “You lost,” I say to the guard holding me down and I laugh, relief filling every part of my mind now that my dragon is gone and the king cannot use her. “Knock her out. Enough,” I hear another guard shout, seconds before the guard on top of me punches me across the face and everything goes black.

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 377-388). Kindle Edition. 

My shoes scrape against the cold stone when I open my eyes. Both my arms are being held tightly in the grips of two guards and I look to the left, crying from the pain of every movement. My right eye hurts to open, and the entire left side of my face feels swollen and sore. I lift my head to look up at the long corridor we are in. The corridor is made of stone, with a green rug stretched down the middle of it. I can see five archways that lead off somewhere else and the guards stop at the one in the middle, which has large wooden doors inside the arch. There are five guards outside the doors, who look at me with a mixture of fear and indifference, an expression I presume they have gotten used to showing. I stand up, not letting them drag me anymore, and look around, but don’t see Livvy anywhere. There are only empty corridors, and an eerie silence that seems to be filled only with our footsteps. “Where is my friend?” I demand, but neither of them answer me as two of the guards outside the big doors open them up. The guards drag me into the dimly-lit room and all I can do is stare at the empty throne at the top of the room. The throne is made from solid silver that shines, and it is shaped like a dragon with a seat cut into the middle of it. The dragon’s head curls around to meet the end of its tail and the gap in the middle leads up to the seat that is covered in green fabric. On the wall above the dragon is a tapestry of a green dragon flying, with two swords at the bottom; it takes me a second to realise it’s the royal crest of the king. The room has five archways, which have dark green fabric hung over them to block the light, and there are ten or more lit fires in raised pots around the room. The fires are almost blue, and the heat from them is soothing. “Stay here, and if you know what is good for you, don’t move,” one of the guards says before he throws me down on the floor as the other one lets go of my arm. I rub my arms, feeling how sore they are, and place my hand on the side of my face where I know it can’t look good. I wish Chaz was here. He could find something to place against my face, he could figure out a way to help me. The guards surprise me by walking out the door as it closes; their evil grins are the last thing I see. I pull myself up to my feet, standing still as a secret door behind the throne opens. The door is the whole wall, a wall that moves on a circle, and a man walks out. Not just a man, the king. The king has long black hair that is going grey at the top, and dark blue eyes that could almost be described as black. He has on black trousers with a smart green shirt, which looks silky and made from something expensive. He looks familiar and nothing like I expected the most evil man in the world to look. He looks nothing like a man who

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 400-421). Kindle Edition. 

kills my kind, a man told to be evil enough to kill a baby. His large crown sits on his head, the green swirls holding a green stone in the middle, and it’s beautiful.

Bailey, G. (2018-01-27). Love the Sea (Saved by Pirates Book 2) (Kindle Locations 421-422). Kindle Edition. 

“Something’s in the air tonight. Change is coming,” I said, staring at the lights that shone from out over the water. “I can feel it. It seems like everything comforting around us is hidden in darkness, and the only things we can see clearly are the glowing eyes of that creature that wants to eat us for its dinner.” Beside me on the walkway atop the fort wall, my ever-practical cousin Honoria gave a derisive snort. “Have you been reading novels again, Evelyn? You know how Father feels about that. Or perhaps this is some hidden flair for the dramatic! No doubt Mr. Boone will greatly approve of you taking him for your template.” How ridiculous! I huffed and folded my arms across my chest, glaring at her, not that she could see it. Mr. Boone, the odious little man that Uncle Richard employed to tutor Honoria and me in music and French, did indeed have a flair for the dramatic. And not one iota of good sense or useful skill in his entire body. I didn’t appreciate the comparison. “Boone doesn’t even know how to use a sword,” I reminded her. The pompous ass did insist on strapping one to his waist, but I doubted he even knew how to remove it from its scabbard. “I could have him disarmed in a trice!” “And it would be better for you if you couldn’t,” she retorted, a not-so-subtle reminder that my unconventional education was not something to boast about, or even to mention, if it could be avoided. I sighed and ran my palms against my thighs, feeling the true weight of my skirts as they settled themselves around my ankles, and the tightness of my corset as I struggled to take a deep breath. In the distance, the lantern lights that so reminded me of sinister eyes flickered and flared with the roll of the waves, warning every soul glancing eastward that the Knave’s Cutlass lay anchored there. The frigate was large and impressive, even in the night, even with her sails furled. She was turned broadside to the fort, so her three tall masts stood against the darkness of the horizon, blacker than the night, while hidden below was her battery of powerful guns, at least thirteen on each side. Anchored as she was just between Senhora and the aptly named shoals of Black Rock Pointe, she blocked all entry and egress to Tartaruga Harbor. In short, the Cutlass had severed our connection to the world. The few men currently stationed at my uncle’s fort had mounted a valiant defense, but the Cutlass remained steadfastly out of range of our cannons. Meanwhile, the blackguard who called himself the Knave had all but destroyed the cargo vessels that had been docked in the harbor. No one on the island had the means to send for help, even if we could hold out long enough for it to arrive. My aunt and the other ladies were twittering and sighing and taking to their beds with nervous complaints. My uncle and the other gentlemen looked grim and wary. Honoria, who had never broken a rule in her life, had been the one to suggest our pre-dawn stroll on the wall to assess the situation, regardless of the punishment Uncle Richard would exact if he caught us. The whole world, my world, had been rocked to its foundations. And I, gentle lady that I was, was allowed to do naught but stand by and wring my hands. I could almost scream from the frustration. Salty wind pulled fine brown hair from my braid to whip across my cheeks, and as we watched in silence, the rising sun colored the sky’s underbelly to red and orange flames. Though it was never cold this far south—and after four years on Tartaruga, I could hardly remember what cold felt like—something in the air made me shiver. “Red sky at morning, sailor take warning,” I said in a low voice. “Oh, bosh! That’s the sort of superstitious claptrap your father used to spout,” Honoria scoffed. “And look where it got him.” Though the comment stung, I replied lightly. “Lost at sea, you mean? Lying somewhere at the bottom of the ocean?” “What? No! Of course I didn’t mean it like that, Ev,” she said quickly, horrified. “I just meant…” “Yes, I know what you meant, dear,” I told her, reaching out to pat her arm, my eyes still on the Cutlass as she bobbed and drifted. Honoria hadn’t meant to recall my father’s death, no, but rather his life and slippery slope down which he’d slid. Deceitful dealings with merchants had led to his fleeing arrest, abandoning his family to scandal, shame, and exile on this tiny Caribbean island, and, if the whispered rumors were to be believed, piracy. Honoria had learned from my father’s example that a single deviation from the righteous path could end in ruin. But to me, her words were a reminder that Papa wasn’t the only one who paid the price for his crimes. That, because of him, I would always be held to a higher standard. That even at the advanced age of twenty-one, even in a corner of the earth where the number of available men far exceeded the number of marriageable women, I was still unmarried. I sighed, feeling heartily sorry for myself for a single moment… then I rolled my eyes. Any more sighing and I’d become my aunt Beatrice. Unendurable thought. “I just wish we knew what the Knave wanted,” Honoria said. Little known, much feared, oft discussed, the Knave’s legend passed from island to island much the way gossip traveled a London ballroom… just as swiftly, and just as unreliably. Fully seven feet tall, he was said to be. Stocky. Slender. Cultured. Handsome. Merciless. Jovial. But all the legends agreed. He was unstoppable. “It doesn’t matter,” I consoled her, wrapping an arm around her waist and placing a kiss atop her white-blond head. “It doesn’t! No matter what that blackguard does, we’ll rebuild! Your father has done it before. We arrived in Tartaruga four years ago poor as church mice, yet somehow he was able to find the capital to start a shipping company and keep us in finery, and curry the power to restore the Hollywell name! Of course he’ll be able to extricate us from this predicament and rebuild. Never doubt it!” Once he made the Knave leave. Somehow. “He meets with Father this morning,” Honoria told me in a low, flat voice. “What?” I pulled away to stare at her. Had she not thought to mention it before now? “I heard Father telling Mother last evening. Father sent John in the rowboat under a white flag to request parley, to learn his terms.” Honoria spoke quickly. “But…” “But what?” “But Father’s afraid the Knave will demand a ransom. He’s afraid he won’t be able to pay it.” I gripped the wall beside me for support. “As it is,” she continued, “he’ll have to use all of the money he’s put aside to dower us.” She gave a halfhearted shrug, as though this didn’t matter, but I knew otherwise. That dowry meant the opportunity for Honoria to return home. To take up the life she should have had. To escape the Mr. Boones of the world, and live among the civilized again. To reclaim the life she would have had… if not for my father. “It won’t come to that,” I told her. “It won’t.” She shook her head sadly. “Father can’t stop it.” “Then I will.” I could tell she didn’t believe me, but I meant the words I spoke. By crook or by knife point, I would make sure Honoria got back to England. Chapter Two Honoria and I quickly concocted a plan that would see the two of us meeting on the balcony that wrapped around the entire second floor of the house—the floor that held our bedrooms, as well as Uncle Richard’s office—as soon as we received word that the Knave was ashore. Sadly, this was as far as the plan had progressed, but I felt confident in my ability to improvise. Papa had always said that in swordfights and in chess play, the key was to know your opponent. I figured that the same rules applied here. Whatever motivation the Knave had for raining his fury down on Tartaruga Harbor, for destroying Uncle Richard’s enterprise, the fact remained that he was a pirate. And I knew the one thing pirates valued above all others—more than loyalty, more than love, more than family, more than vengeance—was treasure. After all, if the rumors were true, my papa had been one himself, and he hadn’t hesitated to deposit me at my uncle’s home years ago and go off to seek his fortune. I would listen to the conversation between the Knave and Uncle Richard. I would hear how Uncle Richard intended to handle things and then, if worse came to worst… I’d spin the Knave a tale of a treasure that no pirate could possibly resist. My own father’s treasure. My heart beat furiously in my chest. I paced to the open window and took a deep breath. From here, the destruction in the harbor was hidden beyond the fort wall. I could smell the salt tang of the ocean, hear the call of the seabirds, and for a moment, forget that danger was close by. I dressed quickly in one of the many gray dresses my aunt had chosen for me, brushed out my hair, and braided it over my shoulder. Gilliam, my uncle’s manservant, arrived a bit later and placed a tray of toast and tea on the small table near my bed. “Your uncle bids you to eat your breakfast, miss,” he said. I was surprised and pleased by this bit of thoughtfulness. But before I could do more than take a bite or two, I heard the bell ring above the gatepost outside, indicating that a visitor had come to the fort. The tea turned bitter in my mouth, and the toast tasted of ash. The Knave was here. I ran back to the window and peeked out just as the gatehouse door was opened and three figures entered the fort. Men. Just men. Walking cautiously, three abreast. The man on the left was stocky and grim. He sported a tremendous full beard and mustache, and had a kerchief tied around his head. His linen shirt was filthy, but his boots gleamed softly in the sunlight. From the colorful silk belt strapped around his waist, the butt of a gun protruded. The man on the right was tallest and leanest. He looked as though he’d just stepped off a ship from London, with his long, curling wig, immaculately
 tailored waistcoat, fine shoes, and cockade hat. And despite the elegance of his appearance, he had a hungry, rangy look. I would not underestimate him, or the rapier that hung at his side. But it was the man in the middle who most intrigued me. He was tall and broadly built. His clothes were entirely nondescript, like a man without use for fashion. Plain white linen shirt that laced at wrists and neck, plain hide breeches, and plain, well-worn leather boots that went to his knees. And beyond that meager description, I could not tell you more, for despite the heat and humidity the frustrating man wore a cowl that covered his head and kept his face in shadow. Yet I knew immediately, beyond a doubt, that this man was the Knave. I inhaled sharply, my eyes fixed on the shadow where his face would be… And he lifted his head, almost as though he could sense my stare. I stepped back quickly, checking to be sure that I remained entirely in shadow. It was impossible that he could know I was there. But still, I had the strong sense of piercing eyes watching me. Mocking me. Infuriating me. I stepped back into the room and glanced around quickly, my stomach roiling with nerves and anger. I strode to my armoire and grabbed my rosewood knife box. My father had given me his knife the last time I’d seen him, five years ago in April, reminding me that a good sailor always carried one. After only a moment’s hesitation, I grabbed the knife and stowed it so that it lay hidden in the flowing sleeves of my dress. Then I stepped out the tall window onto the balcony to make my way to Honoria’s room next door, and then around the back of the house to Uncle Richard’s office. Of course it would not be so easy. “Ah, Miss Evelyn!” Mr. Boone said jovially, the moment I had taken my first step. Boone was dressed as if for court in a lime silk coat and breeches, a fine lace cravat at his throat, and the most repulsive purple and orange brocade waistcoat I’d ever seen. His high curled hair gave him an extra half-foot in height, at least. Although he smiled as if nothing were amiss, there was no reason for Boone to be in this section of the house, lingering outside my room. I realized that he must’ve had the same plan I’d had—to listen outside Uncle Richard’s office and hear firsthand the Knave’s demands—and had ended up on the wrong side of the house. I needed to get rid of him before he spoiled everything. “Mr. Boone! What a surprise to find you here,” I said brightly. “I’d no idea my uncle had given you a room in the family quarters!” Boone’s black eyes widened, then narrowed on my face in shrewd assessment. Hmmm. Interesting. I hadn’t known he could be shrewd. But he rallied, and smiled at me once more. “Not at all, my dear girl! With danger so close at hand, I determined that your uncle would be most appreciative if a trusted family friend, which I have the distinct pleasure of calling myself, were stationed as close as possible to you and your cousin, poised to lend my arm in your defense should the situation require it! Ha ha!” He patted the hilt of the sword at his belt. I had to fight not to roll my eyes. God forbid the situation should ever grow so dire as to require Boone’s limp defense. He was more likely to throw the sword at his enemy than to engage in any meaningful combat. “Your uncle is most protective of you and Honoria, and your reputations, just as he should be! A good reputation once lost… well. I know I needn’t explain further to you.” He shook his head sadly and I fought to keep my temper. “Ah, of course! You wished to protect us! Chivalry lives! And we shall make it easier for you, then!” I told him. I walked several yards down the balcony toward Honoria’s rooms, knowing that Boone’s strict adherence to propriety would force him to accompany me. “I shall be waiting with Honoria in her room. Rather than having to divide your attention, you shall stand guard right outside, and we shall be safe inside!” I clapped my hands together, as though this were all settled. “You are so thoughtful!” “Yes, well… But I thought we all might go inside, and…” I allowed my smile to grow brighter, and my eyes to twinkle. “Ah, you’re teasing me now, aren’t you?” I wagged a playful finger at him. “If you’ve told us once, you’ve told us a thousand times, that young, unmarried ladies should never be alone with a gentleman, and especially not in a private room!” “Well, yes, but under the circumstances, I felt that…” I stepped through the open shutter doors into Honoria’s sitting room. “I’ll just close the shutters, shall I? Make sure all the proprieties are observed!” And just before shutting the door in his face, I beamed at him one last time. “Thank you, Mr. Boone! I feel less anxious already, knowing you’ll be so close at hand!” Then I closed the shutter, latched it from the inside, and leaned my back against it, exhaling slowly. Honoria’s suite of rooms was easily three times the size of my single room, and twice as crowded, packed with heavy velvet and brocade fabrics that Aunt Beatrice insisted on importing from England, despite the way they wilted and moldered in the heat. The effect was not as elegant as Beatrice might have hoped. “Good heavens, what was that all about?” Honoria asked, scurrying from her bedroom into her sitting room. I smiled at the sight of her, pretty as a picture in rose-colored silk with a cream underskirt and scarf. She looked like a china doll my papa had once brought home for me, all pink cheeks and white hair and blue, blue eyes. Delicate, good, valuable… Needing protection. “Mr. Boone will be guarding us from outside!” I said, raising my voice so that Mr. Boone could hear me. “I thought you and I might spend the morning reading quietly!” I widened my eyes deliberately to warn her to play along. “Uh… Indeed!” she cried, far too loudly. “That sounds lovely!” I rolled my eyes and she shrugged. I motioned her quietly to the door on the far side of the room, which led to the inside corridor. As quietly as possible, I explained my revised plan. Her blue eyes met mine, and they were wary but resolute. She nodded agreement. “You’re sure?” I asked. She rolled her eyes at me. “Get on with it,” she said, practical as ever. I threw my arms around her and embraced her quickly. Then I opened the door without comment and motioned her ahead of me. We crept into the hall, closing the door quietly behind us, and made our way around the second floor in the most roundabout way, to the hallway where Uncle Richard’s office was located. But before we turned the corner, we heard the rumble of voices. “Father’s men,” Honoria said calmly. “It must be. He’s obviously posted guards.” Damn! I should have thought of that. Of course I should have. My heart beat faster than ever, too fast, and I was suddenly sweating. I took a deep breath and loosened the scarf tucked into my bodice. “Alright,” I said, defeated. “Let’s go back to your room and…” “Nonsense!” Honoria whispered. “We’ve come this far. I’ll go and distract the guards. You come along once they’re distracted and sneak into Father’s room, and from there to the balcony.” “And what if he has guards posted on the balcony, too?” I demanded, well aware that our roles had somehow suddenly reversed. “Then you will think of some other thing to distract them,” she said, smiling widely. “Have courage, Ev.” Courage. Right. With one last smile and a firm nod, Honoria swept into the next hall. A moment later, I heard her give a thin, shocked, “Oh!” and when I peeked around the corner, I saw her collapsed on the floor in what appeared to be a dead faint. A gentleman knelt at her side, holding her limp wrist in concern, and speaking to another man at the far end of the hall. “She’s fainted! Help me carry her to her room!” Thank God. The two men together lifted my cousin from the floor and carried her down the hall, away from me, and I quickly crept down to the door to Uncle Richard’s bedchamber, and quietly slipped inside. I stepped across the room to the closed balcony door and listened. Moments later I heard the distinctive shuffle of someone outside. I needed another distraction. I looked around the room and spied a low table near the bed. On it sat some papers, likely something Uncle Richard had been reading before bed, held down by a large quartz paperweight. Perfect. I grabbed the paperweight from the table… and was momentarily distracted by the sight of my father’s name on one of the papers. No time for ridiculous distractions. I hefted the paperweight in my hand and crept back to the shuttered door. When the men next door grew loud again, I took my chance, edging the door open just a few inches. Just enough to reach my hand through, throw the rock as hard as I could down the balcony to the right, away from my uncle’s office, and quickly shut the door again. As I’d hoped, the guard stalked down the balcony to investigate the sound. Time for just one quick breath, in and out, before I crept out the door, and then into my uncle’s office. Chapter Three Uncle Richard’s office was large and airy, but filled with expensive, heavy wood furnishings, meant to impress the men who visited him here. I was heartily thankful for that fact, as that made it possible for me to edge past the open shutter doors unseen, and hide myself behind one of the thick brocade drapes that Uncle Richard would insist on hanging around the walls, as though the stucco plantation-style home were a medieval stone keep. My nose twitched from the dust and mold it held. But my view, as I peeked out, was impeccable. I was positioned to the side of my uncle as he sat behind his desk with Gilliam at his shoulder. In the chairs facing the desk sat two of the men I’d seen earlier. The grim man with the immaculate boots was in the chair furthest from me. And in chair closest to me, near enough to be within knife’s reach, sat the man I knew
 was the Knave. He was handsome. That was my first thought. Handsome in a rough and ready way I couldn’t help but appreciate, even though I knew I shouldn’t. Firm jawed, with high cheekbones and thick brown hair tied back in a short queue. Fine lines radiated from the corners of his eyes, as though he spent much of his time laughing… or, I reminded myself, more likely squinting at the horizon, looking for cargo vessels to plunder and innocent lives to destroy. My uncle and the grim man were both leaned forward in their chairs, glaring at one another. Uncle Richard’s face was purple above his damask waistcoat and high collar, suffused with rage. Even Gilliam stood frozen, poised for action. But the Knave leaned negligently back, one ankle resting on the opposite knee, his elbows on the arms of his chair and his mouth lifted in a half-smile as though slightly amused by the whole scene. He made a great show of examining his fingernails. And I hated him. Hated him with a passion that made blood rush to my face while my stomach roiled. “Enough, Ramsay,” the Knave said mildly, breaking the standoff. “He’s said no more than the truth. Half of it, anyway. I am a brigand. And a thief. And occasionally a killer. Though not a bastard, more’s the pity.” His voice was deep, rough, and even, and I understood all at once how a voice like that could drive his own men to battle, or make his enemies lay down their swords. It made my nipples tighten and stirred something strange deep in my belly that felt like fear, but not quite. Then he smiled, a flash of white teeth against his tan skin that struck with the force of a cobra, and continued. “And all of that being true, Mr. Hollywell, you would do well not to trifle with me.” Palpable danger emanated from him. Only a fool could miss it. My uncle inhaled sharply and gripped the arms of his chair with shaking hands. “Now then. We’ve dispensed with the pleasantries and I’ve given you my demands,” the Knave said more forcefully. “So why don’t you give me what I’ve come for?” “I cannot!” Uncle Richard protested. “You will not,” the Knave corrected. “And thus we conclude this meeting with our positions unchanged. I’ll thank you not to waste my time again.” He made as if to push himself to his feet. “No!” Uncle Richard protested. “Surely there must be something else. Some bargain that we can reach!” “Your opening offer was a threat to destroy the very thing I’ve come to obtain—a threat I’ve already taken steps to neutralize, by the by. How can you think that I would now bargain with you?” Disgust was stamped on the Knave’s features. “But, you… You cannot do this. You cannot destroy everything I… She’s the last chance I have left!” The Righteous, he meant. The last undamaged ship in the harbor. His last chance to retain his business, his influence, his opportunity to return home and restore his good name. I clenched my fists in anger and firmed my resolve… then I pushed aside the curtain and drew my knife. “I will not let you do this!” I said, stepping forward quickly and resting the point of the blade against the bastard’s neck before he had a chance to rise. The room seemed to explode into motion. The grim man, the one he’d called Ramsay, stood more quickly than I’d thought him capable of. My uncle pushed himself quickly to his feet, as well, and shouted my name. A wave of nausea had me swaying on my feet, but I steadied myself. The only one who did not move was the Knave himself. He held himself very still… but for a single hand he thrust out to hold back Mr. Ramsay, who had turned his furious glare on me. And then the Knave smiled. “Ah. Miss Hollywell, I presume?” he said softly. I sucked in a deep breath. If I’d thought his voice compelling when it had been laced with irony or anger, I was powerless against it when he spoke my name in that triumphant way. I steeled myself before I spoke. “Miss Evelyn Hollywell,” I clarified, lest he should mistake me for Honoria. “The daughter of…” “Of Arthur Hollywell. Oh, yes. I know who you are.” I felt my forehead furrow in confusion. He seemed almost… happy? “Evelyn, what in the name of the Almighty are you doing here?” My uncle’s outraged voice distracted me for a moment. I glanced his way in time to see him shoot a furious glance at Gilliam before turning my attention back to the man in front of me… more specifically, to the blade I held against him. “I know of a way to make him… to make him leave us alone, Uncle,” I said. My voice was thick with nerves, and I cleared my throat. “Do you indeed?” the Knave asked softly. He turned his head slightly… and I glimpsed his eyes for the first time. Green, as bright as the palm trees that swayed outside my window, lush as the grass in the garden at Papa’s home in Hampstead. I could fall into those eyes and land softly… I shook my head to clear it, but that only made the room spin faster. I clasped the hilt of the knife tightly in my hand, aware that my palm was now sweating furiously. “Yes,” I said slowly, enunciating each word in a way that I hoped sounded deliberate, rather than necessitated by the strange paralysis that seemed to be gripping me. “I know where Arthur Hollywell’s treasure is. I’ll tell you.” The Knave looked at me, and his eyes narrowed on my face. He didn’t appear skeptical, or eager, or gleeful, or any of the things I had expected to see. I would swear he seemed to be… concerned. “Miss Hollywell…” “Evelyn! This is madness!” my uncle shouted. “Be silent.” “No! I won’t allow him to destroy what’s left! I won’t let him have Honoria’s d-dowry!” My right knee buckled, and I was forced to grip the edge of the Knave’s chair with my left hand. “Evelyn!” Uncle Richard rushed around his desk to aid me, but it was too late. The Knave stood and stole my knife from my nerveless fingers before I could even formulate a reaction, then he grabbed me around my waist, as if to steady me. “Ramsay, secure these two and send the signal. The others will be here momentarily,” he said. Then to my uncle, “Come now! You didn’t really think we’d come ashore without reinforcements, did you?” “I will show you… where Papa’s treasure is…” I garbled, as he swept me into his arms. He spoke with leashed fury. “Yes, beauty, I always find the treasure.” Chapter Four “What happened to her, Mr. Ramsay?” A high-pitched, unfamiliar voice entered my consciousness and I froze. Merciful heaven. My head felt heavier than lead and I couldn’t so much as open my eyelids. Where was I? “She was drugged, lad.” A harsher, deeper voice with a distinct lilt, but no more familiar. “Did the cap’n know?” the high voice asked. “Hush!” The word was spoken vehemently, harshly. “You know better’n to ask questions like that, ‘specially with the cap’n ready to spit tacks like he is!” “Aye, Mr. Ramsay.” “Now fetch the water, as you were told!” the harsher voice instructed. “Aye, Mr. Ramsay,” the high voice repeated. Then after a brief hesitation, continued, “She sure is pretty.” “Enough, Porteous! Fetch the water.” “Aye, Mr. Ramsay!” A sharply slammed door announced his departure. I tried to make sense of their conversation. Drugged? Who had been drugged? Who was pretty? Was Honoria here? Who was speaking? And once again, where was I? With all the strength of Hercules at his many labors, I forced myself to open my eyes for one slow blink. I recognized it instantly as a ship’s cabin. And once my mind came to this realization, I began to notice the slow and gentle bobbing of the boat as it rode the swells, and registered the call of the seabirds nearby. So, we were anchored somewhere, then. Somewhere close to shore. I opened my eyes again for another, slightly longer peek. The cabin was large and well-furnished enough that it could only have belonged to the captain. A well-worn wooden desk dominated the entire center of the room. Behind it, a large window let in weak, gray light. The far wall was lined with shelves holding a king’s ransom of finely wrought leather books, and the usual large contingent of neatly rolled maps. And near the door, watching me, stood a man I recognized. Mr. Ramsay. Everything came rushing back. The Cutlass. The destruction. The office. The threats. The knife. The treasure. The Knave. Dear Lord. “Help me!” I croaked, sitting up as quickly as I could and gripping my stomach as a wave of intense nausea rolled over me. Mr. Ramsay hurried over with an empty chamber pot, into which I emptied the meager contents of my stomach. Delightful. “There y’are, gal. There y’are,” he soothed, ineffectually thumping me on the shoulder as a means of comfort. When I’d finished, he handed me a tankard of water. “Drink slow and easy-like,” he warned me. “And don’t fret. Some folk don’t take kindly to the rockin’ of the boat, but you’ll get used to it soon enough.” My instinctive reaction was outrage. Did he really think that my nausea was caused by seasickness? I, who had sailed before I could walk? It took a moment for the full meaning of his words to register. “W-what do you mean, I’ll get used to it?” I asked.

Archer, Maisy (2016-08-10T23:58:59). The Pirate's Captive (Kindle Locations 21-277). Stormy Night Publications. Kindle Edition. 

THREE MEN bled out into the dirt. René stared at the hand that held the bloody rapier. His hand. Tremors shuddered through his body and down his arm. Droplets of blood sprayed the air and joined the carmine puddles that seeped into the sun-baked earth. He closed his eyes and commanded the muscles that grasped the rapier to release their tension and allow the sword to drop. Years of daily practice and pain refused his mind’s order much as they had refused to spare the lives of three men. The heady exultation that filled him during the seconds of the fight drained away and left him empty, a vessel devoid of meaning. He staggered toward an old oak and leaned against its rough bark. Bent over, with one hand braced on the tree, he retched. And again. Still, the sword remained in his hand. A cloud shuttered the sun. Distant thunder brushed his awareness and then faded. Rain. The mundane thought coasted through his mind. He wiped his mouth on his sleeve and glanced down hoping to see a different tableau. No, death remained death, the only movement that of flies attracted to a new ocean of sustenance. The summer heat lifted the acrid blood-rust smell and forced him to turn his head away. Before him stretched a different world from the one in which he had awakened. No compass points. No maps. No tomorrow. The Maestro. The mere thought of his fencing master filled him with both reassurance and dread. René slid the rapier into the one place his training permitted, its scabbard. He walked over to where the huge black stallion stamped his impatience, and pulled himself into the saddle. Some impulse caused him to turn his head one last time. The sunlight that surrounded the men flickered like a candle in the wind, and the air was filled with a loud buzzing sound. Although still posed in identical postures of death, three different men now stared sightless. Their skin was darker than the leather tanned sailors. Each wore a short linen kilt of some kind that left their upper bodies naked. As strange as the men appeared, their weapons were what drew René’s eye. The swords were archaic; sickle shaped and appeared to be forged of bronze. These men wore different faces and yet their eyes— somehow he knew they were the same sailors he had just killed. René blinked and there before him the original three men lay unmoved. Dead. For an instant his mind balked, darkness encircled the edges of his vision. Do not anticipate meaning. The Maestro’s voice echoed in his head. Meaning may be ignored, but it cannot be hurried. The darkness receded, and he reined the stallion’s head toward home. René approached the linden shaded lane to the château. The stately trees, their clasped hands steepled over the gravel drive, had always welcomed him. Now they were just a faded backdrop that moved past the corners of his eyes. Could it have been only hours ago that the anniversary of his sixteenth year had presented itself like a gaily wrapped gift waiting for his excited appreciation? The day had dawned as grand as any he had yet experienced, and he had awakened early, eager for the morning’s light. “Henri,” he yelled, as he charged down the marble staircase and into the dining room. Breakfast was set and steaming on the polished mahogany table. Burnished silver platters and cream colored porcelain bowls held a variety of eggs, sausages, fruits, and breads. How Henri always seemed to anticipate his entry amazed René. “Oui, Master René.” Serene as always, the middle-aged major domo entered the dining room. Henri walked over to the table and poured a cup of tea for René. “S’il vous plaît, be seated, sir.” “I cannot. Maybe a roll and a link of sausage. Henri, do you know what today is?” Henri paused as if deep in thought. “Thursday. Oui, I am quite sure ’tis Thursday.” René took a still sizzling sausage from a tray and did his best to fold it within a baguette. “Non, ’tis my birth date,” he managed around a mouthful of sausage and roll. “Which one is that, sir?” “How do you not know? You were there.” “Well, I remember ’twas after the end of the war. Let me see. The war was over in…” “Very droll, Henri. Your memory works fine, ’tis your humor that leaves room for improvement. Today is... so... I cannot explain, it feels like anything is possible today.” “Given that there is still plenty of day left, perhaps you might sit down and eat. I expect you will need all your strength for a day so filled with possibility.” “I cannot be late.” René gulped his tea and shoved the rest of the roll and sausage into his mouth. “Happy anniversary, Master René.” “Merci Henri.” René checked his appearance in one of the grand foyer mirrors, and then strode toward the courtyard. The time had come to present himself to the Maestro. René vibrated with excitement. He paused just inside the entrance to the training area. This was no way to face the Maestro. He sucked in a deep breath, exhaled, and reached for that quiet center. The torrent of chaotic thought stilled and that unique calm of intense focus settled around him. His friends Marc and Anatole sported their weapons in public. René had yet to earn that privilege. Disarming the Maestro was the only way, and since that possibility seemed as remote as the ability to fly, it generated a great deal of frustration. Today, however, might be the day. He approached the master and bowed, already deep within that inner awareness that catalogued and recorded the location of each element that made up the courtyard. He saw this space with every sense. He knew the groundskeeper had removed marigolds that had overgrown their bed, and that a chair had been added to the small table in its customary place against the lichen streaked courtyard wall. René focused on the Maestro’s eyes. A slight man with pale hair, his face could have been struck from marble for all the information it conveyed. The Maestro bowed in return. “Begin,” said the master. René walked to the stack of bricks in the northwest corner of the courtyard. The sound of birdsong faded, along with the warmth of the sun on his neck, the crunch of the dirt beneath his feet, and the breeze on his face. Paradoxically, while his attention narrowed to the bricks in front of him, it expanded to every movement within the courtyard. The practice area was fifty paces by fifty paces, with one wall a scarred reminder of the Thirty Years War. Slicing the square into two triangular shapes was a well-worn path that measured a little over seventy feet and led from one corner to its opposite. René lifted the first two of two hundred and forty-one bricks, one in each hand, keeping his wrists straight with the palms down and his arms rigid in front of him. He walked across the courtyard and placed the bricks on the ground, then turned and walked back for two more bricks. Two hundred and forty-one bricks, always one left over like the condemned’s reprise that never arrived. The number of times he needed to move the bricks from one side of the courtyard to the other was never fixed, however, it rarely stopped at one. Three moves, sometimes four or five would constitute the day’s beginning. At first, the torturous exercise had left five-year-old René in tears and incapable of lifting his arms, let alone a brick. This day, as René replaced the last brick in its original location, the Maestro spoke. “Do you wish to spar with me?” And René answered with the only answer, “Oui, Maestro.” “Choose your weapon.” René settled deeper into that trance-like state where he was able to respond to external conditions much faster than he could think. He selected a rapier from a table of various edged weapons, each one’s deadly mirror bright angles reflected blue in the morning light. “En garde,” said the Maestro, as he flowed into position. The sparring proceeded evenly, thrust and parry, until René exhibited weakness on his left side— just a touch, a whisper of indecision. The Maestro had a preternatural sense of the feint and was rarely fooled. Although René had long since become comfortable and deadly with either hand, this morning’s strategy required the weapon be held in his left. A deep breath here, a slight pause there. He must be subtle beyond the movement of a butterfly’s wing, for he faced the Maestro. Rasp. The blades slid off each other. René moved to the left, opening his defense for a brief second. As the expected thrust came through, he circled his blade toward the hilt of the Maestro’s and pulled down with all his strength. Silence. They both stared at the impossible, the Maestro’s blade in the dirt. It was as if a deadly snake had sprouted there. The Maestro favored René with a rare smile. “You may now arm yourself.” And with that, he leaned down, picked up his sword—checked to see that René remained en garde— smiled again, and walked from the courtyard. René whooped and danced, exhilarated by the victory. To lift into the air like a bird no longer resided within the realm of the impossible. He swaggered from the courtyard, rounded the corner, and ran into his father’s study. Perched on the edge of his father’s large mahogany desk, René adjusted his newly attached sword to be sure it was visible. “Bon jour, father.” Armand Gilbert looked up from his ledgers and his face came as close to a smile as it ever did. “Bon jour, to you, as well.” René shifted a little, banging the sword against the desk. “What are your plans for today?” His father’s gaze returned to the ledger. Focused on the accounts before him, he failed to comment on his son’s recent change in status. René stood and walked across the front of the desk. “No plans. Probably ride over to Martin’s.” “Perhaps you might run an errand for me first. The Belle Poulé has finished her refit and is preparing to depart. Can you carry a payment to the victualer for me? This year’s early grape harvest has left us a bit shorthanded.” “Happy to. And you no
 longer need be concerned for the safety of your money.” René turned again and brandished the lethal addition to his attire. “We live in dangerous times, but it adds little to be overly concerned.” Armand glanced up, his expression once again approached a smile. Unable to wait any longer, René placed his hand on the sword hilt. “Do I not look a little different today?” “Today? Your birth date. I am sorry I have been so busy, what with the Poulé’s departure and all. I am sure Marie will make something festive for tonight’s dinner and we will celebrate then.” “Non, not that, this.” René struck a martial pose, his hand on the sword at his hip. “My sword. I am wearing my sword. I disarmed the Maestro.” “So I see. Well done.” For René, those two words spoke volumes from a man who was as spare with praise as the Maestro. “Oui, I am happy to carry the payment into town for you.” “Merci.” Armand reached into his desk drawer and withdrew a leather sack heavy with silver. “Here. Make sure you get a receipt.” “I will.” René grabbed the sack with an outward show of nonchalance, and headed for the door. “René.” He turned to face his father. “Happy anniversary.” A broad smile spread across Armand’s face. “Merci, Papa.” René decided to stop for a glass of beer at the Boar’s Head to show off his new status. The tavern’s location along the road from the port into Bordeaux caused it to be a favorite haunt for the young men of the town as well as sailors on leave. A few minutes more would make no difference to the Poulé’s scheduled departure. René strode in to the dimly lit tavern and exhaled the breath that had kept his chest expanded. The room was near empty, with three men seated around a lone table in the corner. No one he knew. He walked up to the counter and ordered a “small beer,” more barley water than alcohol. The weight of his sword thumped against his hip. With this symbol, others would view him as an adult. He was sure that he had grown taller between yesterday and today. The tavern keeper nodded in recognition “Where away, lad? You are excited about something.” “I am on a business errand for my father.” He patted the money pouch. “As for being excited, ’tis my birth date today and a good day to be alive.” “Oui, ’tis. Well then, a happy day to you.” The tavern keeper moved to one of the tables to retrieve empty tankards. The three at the corner table rose and sauntered over to René. “Here is a likely specimen of a young man,” the tallest of the three spit out through rotted teeth. A scar that ran from the corner of his right eye to the bottom of his jaw flexed an angry red with each word. He stopped, his face inches from René’s. “How about you buy us a drink? A wealthy gentleman like yourself throwing a little charity our way.” The other two laughed. All three carried cutlasses. René studied the three men. Having spent eight months at sea when he was eleven, and another seven months at fourteen, he recognized sailors by the way they stood. Seaman just into port exercised care when moving about, for it was the land that challenged long accustomed sea legs. Although he was not concerned, the Maestro had taught him to use his head in any threatening situation. Always take the line of least resistance. Never let useless emotions cloud your judgment. “’Twould be my pleasure to buy three fine sailors a drink.” René motioned to the tavern keeper and tossed coins on the counter. “Set these men up with whatever they choose. “Gentlemen.” René nodded to the ragged sailors, took a final swallow of his beer, and headed for the door. The three men followed René into the street. Again, the man with the scar spoke. “We will be taking the money you carry.” They drew their cutlasses and held them with the casual ease of long familiarity. Although the weapons were nicked, they were otherwise in reasonable repair. These men were veterans. A dead calm, much like the center of a storm settled over René. He radiated threat. The men took a step back. “He is just a damn boy.” The scarred man brandished his sword. “Stop wasting time and give us the coin, or you will be a head shorter before this day gets any longer.” “I cannot give you this money.” René’s voice was quiet, the words spoken without emotion. “Then you are a stupid, dead child.” The scarred man attacked, flanked by the other two. René leaned back and allowed the first blade to sing past his chest. Almost faster than the eye could follow, he had drawn his sword. He stepped into the scar-faced man. With an elbow strike to the chin, he dropped the man to the ground like a rag doll released from a child’s hand. He continued the turn, drew his blade across the second sailor’s throat, and with a swift change of line he parried a thrust from the third. Frantic, the man tried a slashing overhand cut, which René pushed up and to the side. Then a quick thrust beneath the heart. Three inches is all you need. The scarred man rose and shook his head, his face a mask of blood-red rage. He lunged forward. René parried the thrust, and then riposted through his adversary’s neck. The attacker’s face wore a look of incredulity as a fountain of blood sprayed in rhythmic surges from his severed jugular vein. He dropped to the ground a second time, choking as he expired. The fight had taken only seconds. Released from the eye of the battle’s storm, René’s every sense vibrated with the supreme joy of victory, of survival, of life. He had defeated three grown men. He was invincible. Then he looked down. Three men were dead. He had killed three men. The next morning dawned with no hint of change. The quality of light that shone through the mullioned glass windows was no different. The sounds and smells of the awakening château were familiar, but carried no comfort. The courtyard looked the same, but each sound, each smell, each stone’s meaning had changed. Although the incident was quietly taken care of, it could never be undone. Even if it had been grist for Bordeaux’s gossip mill, no one would have blamed René for defending himself. No one but him. He could have disabled the three men and yet he had not. Within the fight’s brief duration he had experienced an exhilaration facing real danger and a strange kind of joy in his power to defeat it. The Maestro never hesitated to wound him and had done so many times over the years, but in his heart, René was convinced he would never die at the hand of the master. There was no pretending the three men’s deaths were accidental, that perhaps he had reacted before the arrival of awareness. To deny truth is to uninvite it. The more unwelcome, the less it appears, until you are left in perpetual darkness. Some part of him had known the inevitable outcome of his actions. Against his level of skill, the fight was not self-defense, it was murder. He had murdered three men and that fact made him sick. René had avoided the Maestro when he returned to the château. He needed time to gather the courage to face the master. His father had told him what he wanted to hear; that his actions were necessary. But the untruth only served to solidify his guilt. He moved into that level of calm attention, which was the essence of the fencer’s art, and walked into the courtyard. He approached the Maestro and, as usual, bowed before him never releasing his focus on the man’s eyes. “I think we will have a cup of tea this morning.” The master gestured toward the small table set against the stone wall. René stopped, confused. He had never been invited to join the Maestro for tea before and had never expected to be. The unorthodox is the application of creative strategy and is usually necessary for victory. There was irony in hearing the echo of one of the Maestro’s previous lessons while facing him. René settled deeper into that level of trance that comprised battle calm and focus. If this was to be a chess match of will, so be it. He sat and then accepted the cup of tea from his teacher. He waited. The Maestro would move the first piece. The Maestro smiled, an expression he rarely wore. “I am aware that you experienced some difficulties yesterday.” “I murdered three men.” “Oui, you did.” René had not expected the Maestro to coat the truth, but the three word confirmation shook him. The silence between them lengthened. René drew his sword from its scabbard and placed it on the table, hilt toward the Maestro. “I am grateful to you for teaching me, but I will never kill another man.” René scraped his chair back. “S’il vous plaît, keep me company a bit longer.” The Maestro gestured at René’s chair. The Maestro had never used the word ‘please,’ and the command was of such proportions that René could not have stood had wild horses pulled him from the chair. “Your skill is a weapon that should never be used with casual intent,” said the Maestro. “Did you employ it with contempt?” “Non, master.” “Did you employ it for personal gain?” “Non, master.” “What emotions are you experiencing?” “Disgust, sadness, anger.” “As I have taught you, all are cousins of fear and fear is useful only as the perception of danger, useful in the moment only. Useless in the past or the future. Is perception by its nature limited?” “Oui.” “Then you do not, cannot, have the entire picture. Destiny and free will are the paradox that confronts our every step. I have taught you to forgo judgment on yourself, for it is often inaccurate.” “I cannot change the way I feel. My desire is to bind wounds, not create them. With a sword in my hand, the outcome can only be death and more death. I will never pick up a sword again.” “René, the universe smiles when it hears the word never. Like all of us, you have a destiny for this lifetime. Although, with our limited awareness, it is difficult to understand, destiny is never involuntary. You have chosen this path, and it will bring to you what you need. There are many roads to awareness.
 Some are rougher and more painful than others, but all lead to our chosen destinations. I wish you well.” The Maestro stood, bowed, and walked from the courtyard. CHAPTER TWO THREE YEARS LATER 1671, Bordeaux, France “HENRI, WHERE is my red coat? I am riding today with Martin and Clarisse. I need the red coat. Are my boots polished?” René pulled open the drawers of his dresser. “Henri!” he yelled again. “Here, sir, and not as young as I used to be,” Henri wheezed out after running up the long staircase with a pair of knee length black boots that shone like polished mirrors. He coughed and leaned against the bed post. “Your red coat is in the armoire, sir.” René flung open the carved cedar cabinet. “Mais oui, ’twas here all along. Sorry for the urgency, but I cannot wait to get out there.” “I quite understand, sir, ’tis a beautiful day. I instructed the groom to saddle Orion.” “Merci. Now, if I can just get these boots on. Why do they make them so difficult? Is father around?” Henri brushed a piece of lint from the shoulder of the coat and held it for René to put on. “I believe he is in the sitting room enjoying breakfast. Shall I tell Marie to set a place for you?” “Not this morning. I just have time for a sip of tea. But I wanted to speak with him before I leave.” “Enjoy your ride, sir.” René raced from the room, jumped onto the polished mahogany banister, and rode it down the grand marble staircase to the main floor. He ran through the mirrored foyer with its pillars and paintings until he came to a stop in the sitting room. His father sat at a small table, his breakfast half eaten. Rene smiled. He was proud of the tall slender man who appeared younger than his forty-seven years. His close trimmed beard held no gray, like his thick brown hair tied back in a queue. With his somber, well-tailored dark clothing, Armand Gilbert looked the man he was, a prosperous merchant. “Father, I heard the Belle Poulé berthed yesterday. What does she carry? Is there something for me? How is Captain Coudray? Still the toughest master on the seven seas? How about...” “Slow down, son. Sit and have breakfast with me. There is plenty of time to hear all the news. The Belle Poulé will remain in port for quite a while. She needs to be scraped, tarred, and refitted before she sees the open ocean again. And oui, Jacques made it back. I am sure he will be happy to see his star pupil. After your last trip as quartermaster, he told me you will be a hell of a pilot one day. S’il vous plaît, sit.” “I am sorry, father, but I am already late. Promised to meet Martin for a ride. Perhaps we can have tea this afternoon.” A once outgoing and gregarious man, Armand Gilbert’s serious expression had rarely softened since his wife’s death. Looking at René, it did so now. “S’il vous plaît, hand me that ledger.” René circled the table and brought the gray leather bound book to his father. “Merci. Is that how you are going out?” “Oui. I look dashing, do I not?” René straightened his coat. Armand swallowed a sip of tea. “Oui, you do look dashing, but you also look unarmed. The world has become more dangerous.” René’s smile drained away. “Father, we have had this conversation too many times. I refuse to carry a sword. I am sorry that it causes you concern, but I will not do it.” “René, it was self-defense.” “I will never kill another man.” Armand fingered his empty sleeve and his expression changed to a rueful smile. “So many things on which I placed the word never that happened anyway. Just saying the word will not make it so. You are a grown man now. Be careful out there. We shall have tea later.” René leaned over and kissed his father on the cheek. “No need to worry about me; I am very good at getting out of trouble. I will see you upon my return.” René brought the giant black horse up hard. There over the crest of the hill his best friend Martin and Clarisse du Bourg waited. “Orion, what say we make an entrance?” He patted the coal black stallion’s neck. A seasoned five-year-old, at seventeen and a half hands, Orion was the essence of power. René leaned forward and released the horse. For one brief instant, horse and rider were motionless. Then Orion exploded into a gallop, giant strides eating the distance between René, and Martin and Clarisse. His abrupt arrival surrounded them with dust. Clarisse’s horse reared, forehooves striking out. “Keep him back!” she yelled. Tall, statuesque, with one leg hooked over the pommeau of her sidesaddle, Clarisse controlled her horse, backing him away from René and Orion. In a quiet cadenced voice she calmed the skittish mount. René moved Orion to the other side of Martin, whose placid gelding stood motionless, refusing to acknowledge the angry stallions now on either side. “Perhaps you need a gentler horse?” René said. “A gentler horse!” Clarisse snapped. “Perhaps you need better manners. If I were a man, I would have already challenged you.” “My good fortune, I guess.” René smiled. Before she could continue, Martin interrupted. “Let it rest. No need to bicker. ’Tis a beautiful day, and we have food and wine. Let us be off.” “Except most of the day is already gone,” murmured Clarisse, her bright blue eyes now dark with anger. “What was that?” René asked. Clarisse bolted. The men were left in a cloud of dust. “I guess she was ready to ride.” Martin grinned. “I have ten francs that says we cannot catch her before she gets to the river.” “A fool’s wager. Orion can beat anything on four legs.” “Ten francs,” said Martin. “I will take that bet.” “’Tis not always the horse,” Martin yelled as they took off after Clarisse. In a burst of speed, René left Martin behind. The air was crisp and warm. René leaned forward and spoke into Orion’s ear. “Come on, boy, will you let that insult go unanswered?” Almost as if he understood, Orion stretched out even more, and thundered after Clarisse’s horse. The thought that chasing an angry stallion might be a mistake passed through René’s mind, but it was lost in the excitement of the moment. The river Garonne shimmered in the distance. They were not gaining on her. This is absurd. There is no way that horse is faster than Orion. One thing is for sure, that girl can ride. René pulled Orion up and slowed him to a canter. He hoped Martin would have the presence of mind not to mention the bet. A long lock of hair fell over his eye. He tucked it back behind his ear, and projected a casual air. When René cantered up, Clarisse was walking her horse along the river, allowing him to cool down before she let him drink. Without warning, her horse whipped his head around and reared, forehooves striking out. Taken by surprise, she fought to keep her seat. Orion screamed and rose on his hind legs, iron tipped hooves striking back. The horses moved in close now, each trying to bite the other. René’s awareness had altered with such swiftness that time itself appeared to pause. He projected an implacable calm, its intensity almost radiant. With his left hand, he pulled Orion’s head around, then twisted right and slapped the other horse on the nose. “Hold!” The world seemed to obey him. For an instant both horses froze. Nothing in that space moved, not even Clarisse. “Clarisse, move him away.” René kept his voice quiet and measured. The world started again. Clarisse regained control of her mount and turned him as René moved Orion back, increasing the distance between the two horses. René’s mask returned—the feckless nineteen-year-old whose sole intent was to enjoy the day. Clarisse’s eyes were wide, her face flushed. “Are you all right?” he asked. Clarisse averted her face to cover the blush that betrayed her. “Of all the stupid…what did you think you were doing, sneaking up on us like that? They could have killed each other.” “If you were paying attention—” “Attention? Why, you idiot. If you had—” Martin rode into the space between them. “What happened?” René and Clarisse began to speak at once. “Hold on, hold on.” Martin held up his hand palm out. “Anyone hurt?” Both shook their heads. “I have never seen either of you like this. Why ruin the whole day?” René returned Clarisse’s angry gaze. A year had passed since he last saw her. They were at some obligatory social function or other that Bordeaux’s upper class crowded into their calendars. Something had changed. Perhaps the way the sunlight shimmered from her long curly black hair whenever she turned her head, or caused sparks of light to reflect from her deep blue eyes. Even her voice sounded different, softer in its stridency. A sheepish smile crept onto René’s face. “I apologize,” he said. “I should have known better.” She returned the smile. “Sorry I yelled at you. No one can predict what horses will do.” Clarisse tightened her grip on the reins to hold her horse well back. “Is there any chance you brought some of that wine your vineyards are famous for?” “I may have done just that. I see a good spot over there. Shall we tie up the horses and spread a blanket out?” René dismounted and led Orion in the opposite direction from the other stallion. “Whoa, Orion, calm down. No more fighting today,” René said, his voice even and quiet, as he rubbed the big horse’s neck. “That girl has spirit. Have to admit, not many could have controlled that horse.” Orion snorted and bobbed his head up and down. René laughed as he tied Orion’s reins to a tree. “You agree, huh?” He removed the satchel that contained the wine and walked over to where Clarisse shook a blanket out. “How can I help?” “I brought some baguettes and cheese. Would you mind getting them?” “Not at all.” René spoke in a low, calm voice as he approached Clarisse’s horse from the front and patted him on the neck. “Whoa, boy, I just want to retrieve this satchel.” He studied the lines of the stallion. He was not so certain Orion could have outrun this horse from a dead start. This was a powerful animal
 and his estimation of her horsemanship rose. Clarisse spread out the blanket on a grassy clearing beneath the shade of a copse of old river birch. Gnarled limbs reached out over the water and granted them shade. René carried the satchel to her, while Martin released a long, slim leather box from behind his saddle. “What have you got there?” René called over to him. Resplendent in gold brocade and ribbons, Martin was the picture of a stylish well to do young Frenchman. He kneeled, set the box on the ground, and then opened it. Nestled within a dark red velvet lining lay a slim, lethal shape. “A new rapier. Came all the way from Toledo.” Martin freed the sword from its velvet embrace as if it were alive. He stood and slashed the weapon down and to the side. The blade shimmered in the sunlight as it sliced through the air with a hissing sound. “Beautiful, right? I thought I would practice a bit. Here, you want to feel the balance?” Martin extended the sword’s hilt toward René. René jumped back as if Martin held a cobra. “Ah, non, merci. You go ahead.” “Oh, sorry. I forgot, you have no affection for swords. Come to think of it, I do not remember ever seeing you hold a sword. There are many good reasons to go armed these days.” “Well, ’tis just that…” Clarisse stopped laying out the napkins and cutlery and listened. “Y-you can get hurt with those things.” “Kind of the point, is it not?” Martin slashed the blade through the air again as if to emphasize his statement. René backed farther away. “I guess I am not that good around sharp objects. I like my fingers right where they are, merci,” he said, becoming very interested in what Clarisse was doing. “Clarisse, ’tis been a whole hour since I ate. What do you have in that satchel?” Clarisse took out cheese and baguettes and then dug deeper into the pack, finding a few small pastries. “Will you open the wine?” Martin moved away a few paces and began basic fencing exercises. René uncorked the bottle and poured a glass for Clarisse and one for himself. Unable to ignore the weapon, he watched Martin out of the corner of his eye. “You seem distracted,” Clarisse said. “If swords make you nervous, you could ask him to put it away. I am certain he would be happy to practice some other time.” “Martin sees that sword as a shiny new toy to wave around. I do not view swords that way.” Martin came to the en garde position. René called out. “Higher and to the right or you will get skewered.” Martin paused. “Directions from the sword master himself.” “Uh, you know,” René stammered. “I must have read it in a book somewhere.” In that moment the wind whistled through the trees, opening a pathway for the sun to shine into his eyes, and in the glare, he was back in the courtyard, memories like a wall of water rushed toward him. The sound of metal rasping against metal was ugly, frightful. Fear washed through ten-year-old René. The Maestro had, for the first time, picked up steel instead of bamboo for their sparring practice. René, on the other hand, had been practicing with a rapier from the time he was eight. He expected it to be worse, paralyzing. Relief that it was not almost cost him an ear, for the Maestro was delivering a vicious cut to the head. At the last moment, René brought his rapier over his head, the knuckle bow pointed in the direction of the thrust. There was a loud grating noise as the steel connected. The wind stopped. The branch swung back to block the sun, and Clarisse was offering him an almond macaron on a silk napkin. “René. René,” she said louder, poking him in the arm. “Sorry.” Clarisse studied the young man seated opposite her. Tall and slim with sun bleached hair, his green eyes seemed to change shade with each moment. “Where did you go?” She placed the delicate confection in front of him. “I, ah…was caught up in the beauty of this place.” He looked at her. “Amazing how beauty can be all around us, and how blind to it we can be.” There was a pause as if neither of them could think of anything to say. The moment was uncomfortable and exhilarating at the same time. Both began to speak—and then laughed. “After you,” René said. “I was wondering if you might join Martin and me tonight. Antoinette is giving a masked ball, and ’twill be, well, excessive. ‘Tis last minute, but they always are.” “I would be pleased to attend.” René smiled. Clarisse straightened and took a sip of wine. She watched him closely from the corner of her eye. “Would there be someone special you might bring?” “Not at the moment. I think I would rather be surprised and meet my destiny as it plays out.” “Martin, are you an expert yet? Come over here and sit with us. I have invited René to come with us to Antoinette’s.” Martin replaced the sword in its velvet case and, still breathing in short deep gasps, found a seat next to Clarisse on the blanket. “What? Is there no glass for me?” “Given the skill with which you waved that sword around,” René said, “I fear intoxicating spirits will lead to your doom. Even in its case, you may find a way to stab yourself with your new amusement, and I would be at fault for your demise. But worry not, I will step up and drink your share.” He reached for the wine bottle, but Clarisse got to it first. She poured a glass for Martin. “I think you are downright valiant—a knight. Here, monsieur, you deserve the finest wine available. ’Tis unfortunate this was the best we could find.” She laughed. “Is that a slight on our vineyards?” René postured. “I must challenge you to a duel. But, alas, you are a weak femme and I cannot challenge you.” “Weak femme, am I? Why you…” Martin jumped up and assumed a martial posture. “You, monsieur, are a… a… Gorgonzola!” “A what?” René jumped up, laughing. “Are you calling me a cheese?” “I am.” “Have at you, monsieur.” René tackled Martin, and they wrestled, rolling down the hill toward the river. “Watch out, you are too close to the water,” yelled Clarisse as she leapt to her feet. They regained their footing, and each struggled to take the other down when René slipped on a spot of wet grass. Splash. They tumbled into the cold water. “Enough,” yelled René. “Touché, you have me. I hit the water first. I should have known better than to duel with the deadly Roquefort, being nothing more than a common Gorgonzola.” René emerged from the water, shaking his head. He knelt before Clarisse. “I am forced by the stronger man to offer you my most humble apology.” “Still, I would see you thrashed for your insult. Gentle femme, indeed,” she said. “Etiquette, however, demands that I accept your apology, the proper forms having been observed.” Martin walked over and struck what he apparently believed to be a martial posture. Clarisse bit back a laugh. His gold lamé clothing had not fared well, its ribbons lay limp against the soaked fabric. The ruffled collar had come loose and now hung over his left shoulder. With both stockings around his ankles, he could not have looked less fearsome. “I hope, for your sake, that you have learned your lesson, monsieur.” He placed his hat on his head. The large gold feather, now drenched, lost its struggle to remain upright, and then, as if to punctuate his statement, fell across his face with a wet slap. All three fell to the blanket laughing. “So what do you think, my brave young men? Shall we retreat to our domiciles after lunch, repair our wardrobes, and reconvene tonight at Antoinette’s?” “What will you go as?” René asked Clarisse. “You must join us to see.” CHAPTER THREE AN ARMY of tall young men costumed as Orpheus returned René’s glance as he passed through the mosaic of mirrors in the château’s entryway. He smiled at his personal collage of mirrored reflections. The multicolored troubadour’s blouse, over black pantaloons with a midnight black cape, fit in well with the riot of color visible on the moving crowd. René attached his mask, tying it in the back. Turning toward the mirrors, he was jarred by the mask’s reflection. Like most masks that depicted Orpheus, it portrayed a caricature of a face with a large nose and downturned mouth meant to express sorrow. This particular mask, however, was a Venetian work of art. Despair radiated from its features, transcending the human condition and evoking the artist’s intended response. Straightening the mask, René entered the atrium and continued along a light filled hallway. Crystal chandeliers suspended from the high ceiling along its length caused the light of innumerable small flames to shimmer their reflection from the intricate patterns of gold filigree along the walls and the polished Italian marble floor. Once through the hallway, René encountered the first of a series of open spaces, each promising to be more elaborate than the previous. He paused in the entryway of a courtyard whose columns were floor to ceiling cages filled with hundreds of singing birds. René had been in his share of Bordeaux’s palaces and châteaus, but this one surpassed them all in its attempt to outdo its neighbors. The parade of historical and mythical beings flowed around him. A voluptuous woman, barely clad in a Cleopatra costume, staggered forward and fell into his arms. She glanced up and giggled. René blinked as he breathed in her stale alcohol breath. He turned his head to find more acceptable air. “Your pardon, monsieur.” She made no attempt to stand. “My, what a muscular young man you are. Are you available?” René disengaged himself, yet continued to hold her upright, his hands firm beneath her arms. “Madame, may I escort you to a seat?” “You may escor… excor… take me to a nice dark corner.” She hiccupped, and then clamped a hand over her mouth to contain another round of giggles. René scanned the room. “Are you here with someone?” “You will do fine.” René signaled to one of the servants to assist him, but before the servant could arrive, an overweight, elderly gentleman accosted
 him. “You, monsieur, unhand my wife. How dare you? Do you not know who I am?” The man barked “I demand satisfaction. Who are your seconds?” René turned his head to his right to meet the man’s glare. If he released Cleopatra, she would fall to the floor. Keeping her at arm’s length, René lifted the lady until her feet no longer touched the floor and then gently deposited her in her husband’s arms. “Would you mind holding her for a bit? I am afraid she has had more to drink than her constitution will allow. Forgive me, as I intended no offense. Your wife tripped. I merely prevented her from injuring herself. She did ask for you, sir— numerous times. You are most fortunate to have such a doting wife. I wish you both a merry evening.” René nodded and then moved off through the crowd. René breathed in a deep breath and exhaled, grateful he had avoided being ‘called out.’ Dueling was illegal, but that fact had not dented its popularity. Duels rarely ended in death. More often, they stopped at first blood, or ‘touché.’ This would satisfy the honor of the offended. Tradition called for the insulted party to choose the weapons and the degree of danger the duel involved. Although hiring an alternate was permissible, René had found avoiding offense the wiser choice. So far, by trading on his youth, he had escaped difficult situations. This had given him a reputation as unusual, perhaps, but he hoped, not cowardly. René approached a lovely young woman who happened to be wearing a Eurydice costume. By her height, he knew she wasn’t Clarisse. Even though she was masked, René had a good idea who the mystery woman was. Still, there remained some doubt, which only added to the spice of the moment. “I am so glad to have found you.” He bent low sweeping his arm before him as he performed an elaborate court bow. “Though I would have gone to Hades for you, ’tis much more convenient to find you here. Will you join me in this next dance?” “’Tis a good thing I was not in Hades, where you would certainly have encountered greater difficulty rescuing me,” she said. “I would be honored to dance with you.” The young woman introduced herself as Aimee de Montrochez, and she proved to be a vibrantly intelligent Eurydice to his Orpheus. As the party progressed, some of the revelers had dispensed with their masks. René spotted Martin, who had removed his. Dressed as Apollo, he had his arm around Aphrodite who had to be Clarisse even though she had yet to unmask. “I see some friends,” René said to Aimee. “Will you accompany me to greet them?” “I may be willing to share you for a minute or two.” She broke into a smile. “We should keep our masks on and see how long it takes them to recognize us.” René wrapped his arm around her waist and led her through the milling crowd. “I have never seen a lovelier Aphrodite, although I must say your Apollo leaves something to be desired,” René said in his best imitation of a stentorian boatswain he knew. “Bonsoir, René.” Clarisse nodded at Aimee. “And who is this lovely creature on your arm?” “How did you recognize me?” “I have an excellent sense of pitch. Once I hear a voice, I recognize it, especially if ’tis poorly disguised.” Clarisse released her mask and smiled. “Sorry to have spoiled your illusion.” “Well, you fooled me,” said Martin. “I was about to challenge you for being so insulting.” “Given your overwhelming skill with the sword, you had best keep the challenges to a minimum.” René smiled down at Aimee before he glanced at Clarisse. “May I present Mademoiselle Aimee de Montrochez? My friends, Martin Devereaux and Clarisse du Bourg.” “Both your costumes are quite marvelous,” Aimee said. Martin wagged his eyebrows as he flared open his gold cloak, exposing the shin length white and gold chiton that hung over his lean frame. Clarisse turned to René. A revealing bit of white gauze defined her as Aphrodite. René swallowed hard, unable to take his eyes off Clarisse. She glanced at Aimee. A long moment passed as the two women considered each other and then exchanged artificial smiles. “René told me all about this afternoon’s ride. Must have left quite the impression.” Aimee sniffed into her kerchief. “Martin redeemed my honor.” Clarisse’s painted smile widened. “I will always redeem your honor, my lady.” Martin bowed low. All three turned toward René. “I, ah, thought the macarons were terrific.” The stilted silence grew more uncomfortable until the music began. “Ah, a cotillion,” René said with gratitude. “Shall we?” The dancers took their places on the crowded floor. The cotillion required each dancer to change partners throughout, bringing René to stand before Clarisse. “You have never looked so beautiful,” René commented when they faced each other. “You saw me this afternoon.” She twirled under his hand. “Oui, but you had on riding clothes—or maybe I never looked closely before.” “’Tis necessary to look that closely in order to see my beauty?” “Ah, no, of course not.” He missed a step and stumbled back into the correct footwork. “What I meant was…well, what I mean is…” “Oui?” “There is no way out of this for me, is there?” “Not that I can see.” “What I mean is that you are lovely. Today, tonight, and all the days to come.” He stole a glance to see if he had talked himself from the hole he had dug. “And that I am an ignorant buffoon without any sense at all. Will that work, do you think?” “’Tis not Molière, but ’twill do for tonight.” She laughed as he spun her again. As the dancers prepared to move to their next partners, René surprised himself when he blurted out, “I hate to let you go.” “I hate to be let go.” Clarisse batted her eyelashes as she gracefully moved in front of the next man in line. The round changed again and René found himself in front of Aimee, who wasted no time in asking, “Are you serious about her?” René missed another step. “Serious? Although I have known of her for a few years, I did not meet her until this afternoon. What makes you ask?” “Oh, nothing much. The field is open then.” “Sounds like a hunt of some kind.” René stepped around her. “Should I be concerned? Are there weapons involved?” “Depends on your definition of weapons.” Aimee glanced down her nose as she curtsied low. “W-what?” René stammered. Aimee’s costume slipped a bit showing more décolleté than was polite. “I mean, what were we talking about?” “Exactly. Do you think you could escort me home tonight?” She curtsied to him once more. “Well, I…why, of course. ’Twould be my pleasure.” “It might, it just might.” She winked as she moved on in the line. What had just happened? The next few minutes went by in something of a blur, René moved through the dance steps and partners by habit until he heard a loud slap and a curse. Clarisse stood in front of Victor Gaspard. Apparently the fool had once again done something inappropriate, and Clarisse had rewarded him for his trouble. René pushed his way through the dancers toward Clarisse. Gaspard was a couple of years older than René. A natural bully, rumor had it that he hurt people for pleasure. As a child Victor had been heavy. Now an adult, his height had caught up with his girth, and he was just big. If the rumors were true, Victor had already killed two men in duels, perhaps more. Clarisse held her gown together across her bosom. Martin scowled and stormed toward Victor. “Not good.” René reached Clarisse and Victor seconds before Martin. “What have you done now, you—” Martin started to yell. “Clarisse, are you all right? Martin, see to her.” René caught Clarisse’s eye, and she nodded. “Martin, I am feeling faint and need some air. Will you help me outside?” She draped herself over his arm and steered him away from Victor. René turned to find himself face to face with the flushed Gaspard. The air snapped with Victor’s rage. He required a target, and fate or fortune had selected René. “Who do we have here?  Why,  ’tis  our local coward, the snivel-ing pacifist. With all the heroes available, she must not be very good if you are the best she could find,” Victor snorted. “Well, weakling, what do you have to say?” echoed Maurice, Victor’s habitual shadow. He edged nearer to Victor’s elbow, parroting the words of his god in a whiny voice. The crowd, their eyes glittering like jackals awaiting a kill, pushed and elbowed their way closer to René and Victor. Aimee watched with a focused expression. “Gilbert, get on your knees and apologize for the woman’s actions. I have been grievously assaulted. Do you not agree, Maurice?” Victor folded his arms across his chest. Maurice glowed with anticipation, a runt hyena posturing with the pack behind him. “Oh, I concur. Definitely on his knees.” “Embarrassing, but there is no pain. You would gain more satisfaction by injuring me, especially in front of all these people.” “Given your cowardice, you refuse to duel. What do you suggest? Fight like the lower classes, bare fisted?” asked Victor. “Non. I was thinking more along the lines of a game. I hold my hands together out in front of me, and you smack my hands. For each time you connect with my hands, you may punch me in the face. You get five tries.” Victor considered himself a master swordsman, with lightning hands, an arrogance René counted on. “Sounds like good sport, but what do you get?” “If by some small chance you should miss all five times, I get to leave this soirée in one piece, with no offense taken on either side.” “Done. Your smile will look different when this is finished.” Victor smirked. “Will you need someone to hold you up?” “I think I can manage.” René breathed deeply and allowed that calm, centered focus to settle within. When he looked into Victor’s eyes, in that timeless interval between one instant and the next, a heavily muscled ancient Egyptian general stood in Victor’s place, armed and armored in bronze. René blinked and Victor’s habitual sneer once again faced
 him. René’s iron focus remained firm. He would consider the vision later. This moment had no room for its examination. He stood easily, balanced, aware, his hands held out, palms touching. As he anticipated, Victor made the first attempt as soon as he extended his hands. René moved them out of the way, and Victor’s right hand passed through the space where his hands had been. So violent was Victor’s swing that he almost fell. René reached out to steady him. Victor knocked his arm away. “That one did not count,” said Victor. “Why is that?” René asked. “Because you were not ready.” “I am ready now.” He held his hands out again. Victor tried once more to catch René before he was set. But as the Maestro had taught him, one must always be set. Circumstance rarely waits for us to be ready. Once again, Victor’s hand smashed through empty air. “One,” the revelers called. René nodded to the onlookers, grateful they were involved. He had little confidence in Victor’s motivation to count to five. This time Victor wound up with his right hand and swung his left. But again René’s hands were absent, and Victor’s angry swing met no resistance. “Two,” the glittering audience shouted. More people joined the throng around them, vying for a choice location to see the action. René had pulled his hands up every time so far. On the next attempt, he moved them down out of the way. Victor’s swipe missed by a league. “Three,” the chant increased in volume. Victor’s face was a deep blood red growing darker by the minute, partly from the exertion but more from the embarrassment of not having connected. There would be no good ending to this confrontation, but René hoped he could avoid Victor long enough to let the incident fade. He considered allowing Victor to punch him once, thinking that perhaps that would satisfy him. Again, he heard the Maestro’s words. Evil will never be satisfied. There is no bargain with the devil. Do not ever pretend that there is.” Another attempt, this one turned Victor full circle like the dancing bear in the circus that stopped in Bordeaux the previous year. “Four.” The crowd jeered louder. For his final shot, Victor tried to secure René’s arm with his left hand while striking his outstretched hands with his right. Even thus encumbered, René easily lifted his hands out of the way. Victor only managed to slap himself. “Five,” the throng roared, as hands grabbed René and carried him away from the contest. It was good they did, for René had seen only the promise of death in Victor’s bloodshot stare. René caught Aimee’s arm as the crowd hustled him along. “If you want to ride with me, now would be a good time to leave,” he shouted. “Timing is everything,” she yelled back. They raced to where his driver had brought the carriage around. “The young lady said you would be needin’ immediate transportation.” Marc gripped the reins tight. Smart girl, that Clarisse. CHAPTER FOUR “WHEN I find that coward, he will regret this day,” Victor muttered as he shoved a young couple out of his way. The man spun around. His expression flashed from anger to fear as recognition set in. Maurice laughed and pushed him again, harder, knocking him completely off-balance. The young man tried to remain afoot, but the uneven cobblestones defeated him, causing him to stumble and fall to his knees. He scrambled to his feet, grabbed his lady’s arm and hurried her away. The day after the ill-fated soirée, Victor and Maurice scoured Bordeaux searching for René. As each hour passed with no sign of him, Victor’s anger increased. “The coward must be hiding in his room.” “He cannot stay there forever,” Maurice said. “’Tis hot and all this walking has made me thirsty.” “I know what I thirst for, and ’tis not wine.” Victor grasped his sword’s hilt. “I intend to disfigure this one. The fool is far too pretty and will surely thank me for giving him the look of a man.” Victor barged into a couple returning to their carriage from the day’s shopping expedition. Overburdened, the man’s packages spilled from his arms onto the unforgiving street. Crash, the familiar sound of breaking glass. Heads turned. A blood-red liquid seeped into the gravel between the stones. “You clumsy oaf! Look what you have done. You will pay for that wine and everything else you have damaged.” “Do you dare to insult me?” Victor stepped closer, his smirk inches from the luckless individual’s face. Eyes widened as the man recognized Victor. He stammered, “Uh, I meant that…” “What did you mean by ‘clumsy oaf’?” Victor smiled with brutal anticipation as his hand again moved to rest on the hilt of his sword. Sweat beaded on the man’s now pale forehead, his breath came faster in gulps. “Why, monsieur, I was swearing at myself for being such a clumsy fellow. I often get in my own way.” Victor joyfully glared down at the now shaking man. “I notice that you carry a sword, sir. Are you prepared to use it?” “I am sure that will not be necessary. No harm has been done here.” The man stepped to his left. Victor moved to block him. “Oh, I beg to differ. You have accosted my sense of propriety. Even were you not speaking to me, my sensitive nature has suffered from the roughness of your tone. I demand satisfaction, monsieur. If you will send your seconds to meet with Maurice here, we can arrange to settle this debt.” “Surely no duel is warranted. I beg your pardon if I have offended you, monsieur. S’il vous plaît, accept my apology, and let us be on our way.” “If only I could. But I have been sorely unsettled, and all of these fine people witnessed that offense.” Victor glanced at the crowd that had gathered for some afternoon entertainment and nodded. “I doubt if even first blood will satisfy the empty feeling I am experiencing. But…” Victor let the word hang there. “But what, monsieur? I am most disposed to agree to any compensation you might require.” I will have your sword.” “My sword?” “Oui, your sword. Clearly you have no use for it, and I want to make certain that you do not injure yourself with it.” The man withdrew his sword and handed it to Victor, hilt first. Victor pretended to study it. “Not a bad weapon, but I am certain ’tis made of inferior steel. Much like its owner. I must test it.” He touched the tip of the sword to the ground and smashed his boot into the blade. The blade bent into an L shape. “Non, I must have been mistaken in my appraisal. An inferior blade would have broken. This one did not, so I am more confident you will not harm yourself with it.” Victor handed the bent sword back to the man. “See that you are more careful when you are out walking, or you may find the next man less gracious and forgiving than I.” Victor smiled. “Come, Maurice. Now I am thirsty.” CHAPTER FIVE RENÉ ENTERED the Moor, one of the new chocolate houses appearing throughout Bordeaux. Dark mahogany tables crowded the floor and private alcoves, while Turkish hand-woven carpets created a garish spectacle of color on the walls. René paused as he caught sight of Clarisse. Seated opposite Martin, she laughed as she waved her arms to emphasize the story she told. With each gesture, her long black hair reflected shimmering cascades of light. René struggled to reclaim his attention and then walked over to the table. He bowed before Clarisse. “You are quite beautiful today.” “Is that an attempt to make up for your faux pas the other night? If so, keep trying.” Her full lips tipped into a heart stopping smile. His heart raced. For someone who had spent most of his life conquering the mundane rhythms of life, that involuntary response almost undid him. Unexpected, this new emotion struck him like a hammer against a church bell. A soundless note that shook him to the core, knocked him completely off balance, and yet filled him with excitement. He took a deep breath counting on his training to see him through the next minute without embarrassment. With utmost concentration, he turned toward Martin. “And you, sir. How do you fare this fine afternoon?” “Breathing in and out quite well, merci. And yourself?” “Excellent.” René broke into a grin. The serving girl set two cups of steaming chocolate before Martin and Clarisse. She glanced at René. “May I get you something, monsieur?” “Oui, a cup of sweet hot chocolate, s’’il vous plaît.” “I am not unaware of what you did the other night,” Martin said with a grimace. “I did not require your assistance. I can take care of myself, and that ass needs to be disciplined.” “He needs something, but not from you or me. Even though we are capable of killing a snake, it seems ill advised to go around looking for one to step on.” The serving girl placed René’s drink in front of him with a thunk. He blew on the steamy dark liquid and then took a sip. “How did your evening with Aimee end?” Clarisse cocked her eyebrow. He choked on the sip of chocolate. He swallowed and cleared his throat. “Are you all right, René?” “That hot chocolate is hot. By the way, merci for alerting my driver. I needed to make a precipitous exit, and I was glad to see him out front. ’Tis probably a good idea to stay out of Victor’s way for a few weeks. Do you not agree, Martin?” “It still irks me,” Martin said. “Where is the justice when someone like Gaspard forces you to hide in your own town? What is the point in accumulating wealth and power if you cannot use them to protect yourself and those you love? I am done looking over my shoulder.” “I suppose we could have him assassinated.” René winked at Clarisse. Martin laughed. “’Twould go poorly for you if your assassin missed.” “Leave it be, Martin. I have,” said Clarisse. “Victor will soon find offense with someone else, and our lives will go on.” “I notice you are armed.” René nodded at the sword buckled at Martin’s waist. “I have never been that martial, but I am taking lessons so that I will not embarrass myself. I command more respect when I wear the
 sword. ’Tis a good feeling.” Martin stirred his chocolate. “’Tis all about respect.” The words of the Maestro echoed in René’s memory. Respect is another name for fear. No more, no less. A healthy respect for your sword will serve to protect you from those who continually need to test it in order to shore up their own self-confidence or, more precisely, their lack thereof. Know who you are, along with the limits of your capabilities, and other men’s regard will flow to you naturally, for you will know the way, where they will not. Most will want to follow you, but some, in their blindness, will strike out at you, even though you be their only salvation. Their fear is too great. Of these men you must be most watchful. They will strike at you as a snake will strike at its own reflection, continuing to strike even when it has battered itself near to death against the mirror. These men you must kill, for there is no other way to be rid of their threat.” “René… René…” Clarisse reached over and touched his shoulder. “Sorry.” “Where do you go? ’Tis not flattering that your attention wanders off in mid-sentence. Were you thinking of Aimee?” Clarisse asked. René smiled, for it was impossible for thoughts of the Maestro and Aimee to exist side by side. “Non, a teacher I once had. Stray thoughts come up from time to time. But tell me,” he said, changing the subject, “what entertainments do we have to look forward to? I heard Molière’s Le Misanthrope will be presented at the new opera house this week. ’Tis supposed to be outrageous.” “Then we must attend. One of our servants will reserve seats for us,” said Martin. “Excellent. It opens Saturday. Aimee and I will meet you there.” René drained his cup. “I do not suppose anyone needs to ask me if I should care to go.” Clarisse’s blue eyes darkened. “Forgive me. My dear Clarisse, would you consider joining me this Saturday in seeing Molière’s new play?” Martin asked. “What do you think, René? Should I attend with this dull, boorish fellow?” “’Twould help him so much. He does the best he can, but worry not; I will be there to help you stay awake if his company gets too droll.” “With friends as good as this, I may as well shuffle off this mortal coil, for I am undone already.” Martin uttered a long sigh. “Still, you are both amusing at times.” “Amusing, am I?” Clarisse took a swipe at Martin that he deftly avoided. “I am so amused that I think ’tis time I made my way home.” Martin stood and offered a hand to Clarisse. She pushed his hand away. “’Twas a pleasure to see you, René.” She leaned over and kissed him on the lips. The unexpected shock of her lips on his froze René in bewilderment. From the corner of his eye he saw Martin react in similar fashion. “Now that was amusing,” Clarisse said as she strolled from the shop. René watched her until she exited the tavern. As she closed the door behind her, the small bell atop it sounded a tinkling note as if to punctuate her departure. He turned and looked at Martin who just shook his head. Both fell back into their seats. “What was that all about?” asked Martin. “I am sure I have no idea.” René focused on his cup of chocolate. “That girl has got a mind of her own, and that is the truth. ’Tis all I can do to keep up with her most days.” “Are you serious about her?” René met Martin’s gaze. “For the moment I am. If you are asking whether I am planning on matrimony any time soon, then my answer would have to be no. As fascinating as Clarisse is—and I must admit I have met no one who comes close—there are too many daisies in the field to settle on one just yet.” René sat back, quiet, thinking about the feel of her lips. “She is certainly different.” “She is that.” Martin stared in the direction of Clarisse’s exit. CHAPTER SIX THE NEARLY completed Galois Theatre was a gargantuan imitation of Roman arrogance, a marble monstrosity intended to surpass the Paris theatres. René and Aimee struggled to gain entry beneath the giant pillars; the opera crowd that surged around them was but one step from violent skirmish. This night was special, even for the jaded Bordelais. Tonight’s performance was the first premiere of Molière’s Le Misanthrope outside of Paris. The play satirized the hypocrisies of French aristocratic society. Peopled with familiar characters, it was perfect for the local well-to-do, many of whom considered themselves only slightly lower on the ladder of humanity than the mythological gods. Everyone was in attendance tonight. More than a few fights erupted over which seats belonged to whom. Martin and Clarisse arrived early with servants in tow to protect the two additional seats. René and Aimee finally managed to reach them. “All we need are the barricades and we will have a revolution.” René helped Aimee into her seat. “I wager we have more realistic warfare going on up here than there is likely to be down there on stage.” “Attending one of these is not for the fainthearted,” Aimee said. “’Tis riotous out front. I have never seen so many carriages. I hope the building is sturdy.” René smiled. “Plenty of good Italian marble in this building. The opera house will be here long after we are gone.” “We brought wine.” Clarisse pulled glasses and a bottle from her basket. “You, mademoiselle, are not only beautiful, but brilliant as well,” said René. “Shhh, quiet, the opera is starting,” Aimee said. “Quiet?” Martin laughed. “I see little chance of that happening.” The play began, and the audience responded to every word, every gesture from the actors, often with more heat than those on stage. As the final act ended, the crowd erupted into barely restrained chaos. People argued while hawkers yelled out their goods, selling everything from wine to meat pies. “Oh look, Paulette is down there. I must go and say hello.” Clarisse stood and glanced toward the stairs. “Would you like an escort?” Martin stood. “I am not helpless, you know. ’Tis just downstairs and you can see me once I reach the floor. I will be fine. Have another glass of wine.” Clarisse pushed her way through the crowd to the hallway behind the gallery and then down the marble staircase. A group, arguing over the stupidity of the hero, blocked the closer of two doors that allowed entry to the main floor of the theatre. She elbowed her way beneath the giant crystal chandeliers that lit the marble lobby toward the door on its opposite side. This side of the theatre held private suites, where the very wealthy retired between acts. As Clarisse was about to open the door to the ground floor seating, she was grabbed from behind and pulled into one of the suites. The door slammed behind her and the noise of the crowd diminished to a dull murmur. She struggled to speak or turn around, but strong arms imprisoned her, and a calloused hand clamped her mouth. “You can take your hand from her mouth, Maurice,” Victor said as he walked around in front of her. “You may scream all you like. The amount and thickness of the marble that makes up these suites was intended to minimize the amorous sounds from within. No one will hear you.” “You are a pig, Victor. Let me go!” Clarisse struggled against Maurice’s iron grip. “I have been unable to flush out your friend René, but when he hears of this, he will come find me, and then I will finish the business we started.” Victor reached forward and ripped open her bodice. Clarisse kicked out. Victor deftly stepped aside. Maurice jerked her arms behind her tighter. She screamed. “Take her into the other room.” Victor pointed toward a closed door. “I believe there is a divan in there. After all, this should be civilized.” Maurice dragged the still struggling Clarisse into the other room. He forced her down onto the long cushioned seat. One of her arms escaped his hold. She twisted and jammed her fingers into his eyes. Maurice screamed and stumbled back. Clarisse sprang from the divan and cast about for an avenue of escape. Victor swaggered toward her, his thick lips curved in a nasty smile. Forced to retreat, she bumped into a table and grabbed the first thing to hand, a gilded alabaster statue. She flung the statue with all her strength. Victor raised his arms and covered his face. The heavy marble figurine struck him between the legs with every bit of her loathing behind it. He collapsed to the floor writhing in pain. Clarisse ran from the suite. If either René or Martin learned of this attack, it would mean their death, for they would challenge Victor. Just as he intended. She retraced her steps back to the stairs, now grateful to be surrounded by the raucous throng of theatregoers. She took in a deep calming breath and then straightened her gown. The bodice was ripped, but her shawl remained, snagged on a jeweled pin. She arranged and tied it across her chest and climbed the stairs, composing her features and gaining control of her pounding heart. “Where did you go?” asked Martin. “I was about to come look-ing for you. You never did get to Paulette.” “Oh, I saw someone else I knew.” Clarisse sat and arranged her skirt. “You know me, always stopping to talk to someone. I could use a glass of wine if you have left me any. What were you talking about?” René paused in pouring. His eyes met hers. “Clarisse, is something wrong?” “Wrong?” She glanced away. “Non, of course not. I just cannot figure out what Alceste could possibly see in Célimène.” Clarisse laughed, but it was hollow. “The wine, René. Are you pouring it or practicing the art of being a statue?” René topped off the glass and then handed it to Clarisse. She turned to Martin and whispered something in his ear, causing him to laugh. René kept his gaze on Clarisse, but she avoided him. René was fourteen when the Maestro took away his sword. “You are becoming barely proficient with the sword, so we will now explore the most powerful weapon of all. You will not always have a sword. You might not find
 a sharp instrument of any kind, and what will you do then?” Having so often felt the bamboo rod for failure to respect the master, René straightened to answer the Maestro. “As you have taught me, I will improvise using whatever is at hand to defend myself.” “What would you use in this case?” The Maestro swung his arm to encompass the now-empty courtyard. “I would use the bamboo rod you are holding.” Whack! The rod came down against René’s wrist. “Do you think that is possible in this case?” “Probably not.” René rubbed his arm. Whack! The rod came down again. “No, Maestro. I think there would be a low probability of my gaining control of the bamboo rod in this case.” “Think precisely, boy. And think quickly. You may not always have the luxury of time.” “I would use my hands and feet and head. I would use the dirt beneath my feet and the sun above my head. I would use all you have taught me, and I would find a way.” “There is one thing you have not mentioned, and that is your awareness. You have within yourself the ability to connect to a larger universe than the meager one you can see, hear, and feel. Within this universe are all the thoughts and emotions of those around you. With practice, you may be able to access some of those thoughts and emotions, as well as predict with useable accuracy what the next few minutes will hold—and sometimes even beyond that. With much practice, this awareness will reliably alert you to danger.” “Do you mean I will be able to read a person’s thoughts?” “I have taught you to recognize the thought that precedes movement, to be aware of the emotional currents that swirl around every life form. Why does it seem impossible to attach meaning to the movement of energy, for thoughts are but encrypted bursts of energy? I would not, however, waste time trying to parse meaning within a combat situation.” The Maestro again attacked with the bamboo rod. Returning to the present moment, René centered himself, allowing the mental and emotional currents swirling about him to register fully against his consciousness. He had learned to separate the individual strands of awareness, and he began to isolate Clarisse’s thoughts and emotions from those of the crowd. Fear and Victor were predominant against a background of confusion, but it was impossible to decipher meaning while immersed in the emotional cacophony of the theatre. Although the final curtain had come down, on the main floor there was disagreement over the ending of the opera, which devolved into a melee. “Come, René, we must leave now if we expect to remain in one piece,” Martin said. René returned to physical awareness unsettled, his sense of threat still active. A part of him had been paying attention, because he remembered the end of the opera. Yet his inner self was still attempting to make sense of the impressions he had gleaned from Clarisse. Something about Victor, something important. Martin and Clarisse were standing, as was Aimee. “Come, let us leave,” said Aimee. “I, for one, did not think Alceste deserved exile. René, you were so focused. Have you not seen a play before? René?” “Me? Oh oui, I enjoyed it,” he answered, still deep within the awareness of threat. “Well, no need to brood over it.” She laughed. “’Tis just theatre.” René rose and took Aimee’s arm. For a brief second, his gaze caught Clarisse’s, before she turned away. Was that fear he saw? They managed to get clear of the crowd and reach the carriages without incident. He wanted to protect Clarisse— no, he needed to protect her. The power of the thought startled him, and he was quiet throughout the rest of the evening, dropping Aimee off with the weak, if honest, excuse of having to work early with his father the following day. CHAPTER SEVEN RENÉ AND his father rode toward the port along the verdant banks of the Garonne River. Armand Gilbert sat astride his mount easily, the reins in his left hand, his right an empty sleeve tucked into his waistcoat. The river road snaked through a valley of rolling farmland and forests. Long before they saw the tall ships’ masts silhouetted against the cloud-filled horizon, René caught the smell. The unique combination of dead fish, tar, and the rancid fat ships used as a lubricant. About fifty yards ahead, two men walked toward them. Hard to imagine a more disreputable pair. As they came abreast of the men, the shorter of the two called to Armand. “Our ship made port, and we wondered if you could give us a bit of direction.” When the horses had come to a stop, the man came around to Armand’s side. He took hold of the horse’s bridle while pulling a pistol from the sash around his waist. “Get down. I am tired of walking.” “What did you do to get thrown off your ship?” asked René. “Shut up, boy,” yelled the man as he redirected the pistol toward René. “Get off the damn horses, and throw down your swords.” René and his father dismounted. Armand dropped his sword to the ground. The shorter man snapped up the sword and then tucked the pistol in his belt. “No load in the pistol, huh?” said René. “I said shut up, boy.” Both thieves turned to Armand. “Hand over the coin you carry. Man dressed as you must have a pretty penny on him.” René’s father had shared his love of maps with his son and always carried the valuable parchments protected within a tough burgundy leather case some three feet long. Half hidden by his father’s horse, René loosened the straps holding the case and then pulled it from behind the saddle. He hid the case behind his leg as he walked toward the shorter robber who was clearly the leader. “I do not think we will be loaning you our horses today,” said René. “And how exactly do you plan to do that and not become crow’s meat?” The man flourished the filched sword. Whack. The man’s sword lay in the dirt. René stepped forward. Whack. A strike behind the ear, and the man joined the sword. The leather map case had moved so fast as to be almost invisible. René radiated a deadly calm as he turned and walked toward the larger man. “If you drop the sword, I will not be forced to hurt you.” René’s voice was quiet, lacking emotion. “In a pig’s eye,” yelled the man as he charged. René turned and backhanded a cut to the man’s throat. He then tapped him behind the ear. The man joined his partner in the dirt. Both were unconscious. René stared at the two men lying there, and in that instant he was outside the Boar’s Head tavern again, staring down at the three men he had killed. The memory was startling in its clarity. “Are you injured?” His father grasped his arm, returning him to the present. “I am all right, Father.” “So fast.” His father’s voice was filled with awe. “I knew you were skilled, but I had no idea. The Maestro told me when you were much younger that you would be one of the greatest to ever wield a sword and that it was his privilege to teach you.” René laughed as he picked up his father’s sword and handed it to him. “He never told me anything even remotely like that.” “I know he was harsh, and whether you believe me or not, there were many times I almost put a stop to your training. But I refused to let you end up like me.” His father glanced at his empty sleeve, and then he remounted his horse. “I would not have you experience the living death that results from being unable to defend the ones you love. At least you have set a father’s concerns to rest. I will speak with Jacques this very day, and we will begin planning your further education aboard the Poulé. We must inform the dockmaster of these two so that they do not ask directions of anyone else.” René looked out at the Belle Poulé where she rested on her side within a shallow channel. Shipworm was the bane of sailing ships and her seamen worked hard scraping and careening the hull, replacing the planks that were too far gone. “Our unwelcome interruption has made me late for a meeting with the port commander.” René’s father scanned the ship in quick evaluation of her progress. “S’il vous plaît, René, give my regrets to Captain Coudray and let him know I will try to get back later this afternoon.” “I will. Have a good meeting,” René said. His gaze never wavered from the ship in which he had spent so much time. “René… René.” Reluctantly, he turned his attention back to his father. “Oui, Papa?” “I expect a report from you on the ship’s readiness. It will give me an idea of how prepared you are to accept an officer’s billet.” “Oui, Papa.” Armand Gilbert looked on his son with an understanding smile as he reigned his horse toward the port offices. René turned and jumped into the longboat provided for transfers out into the channel. The men had already scrubbed the Poulé down with lye, killing the small vermin that collected on an extended voyage. At low tide, the crew had used ropes to pull the ship over to inspect her keel. The main work of the next few days would be to caulk the hull. The tide gently lapped against the boats snugged alongside the Poulé as the men painted the hull with tar from the bubbling pitch cauldrons. “Ahoy, the master,” René called from the longboat as it approached the Belle Poulé. He loved this ship and knew every line. Those wonderful days he had served aboard her flitted through his mind. During his first time at sea he had served as a cabin boy, young and inexperienced. Eight months of hard labor, excitement, and the occasional mind numbing repetitive boredom of the sea had passed by the time the Poulé once again entered the port of Bordeaux. On his second voyage, three years later, he was trained for the quartermaster’s position. The captain had instructed him in the fine points of trigonometry and navigation aboard this ship. The wash of memories became a flood. Captain Jacques Coudray turned from his inspection of the new planking and searched the horizon for the owner of that voice. His face split into a wide grin as he saw René approach
 in the longboat. “Well, if ’tis not a shipworm returning to my hull. Break out the cannon, or we are doomed,” Jacques called out. René’s boat smacked against the longboat in which Jacques stood. “Permission to come aboard, sir?” René asked, for he could no more ignore the formalities than stop breathing. “Permission granted, Worm, and welcome,” boomed Jacques. René grinned at the nickname he had earned as a cabin boy for his willingness and skill climbing within the cargo hold’s narrow spaces. He crossed to the boat where the huge shipmaster grabbed him in a bear hug, easily lifting him off his feet. Jacques Coudray was a full four inches over six feet tall with muscle covering every inch. “If you crack my ribs, sir, I will be of little use to you,” wheezed René, barely able to breathe, let alone speak. “Such presumption, Worm! Expecting you will be of any use! Still, ’tis good to see you, son.” Jacques released René. René took a moment to assess the changes time and the sea had wrought on his captain. With his long hair tied in the back and a flowing black beard, Jacques Coudray was the portrait of a young girl’s fantasy pirate. “You are still the same, not changed a bit,” said René, secretly relieved. The sea aged a man faster than most other occupations. “Cannae say the same for you, Worm. Looks like you grew a foot since I last laid eyes on you. Still practicing with that poxy sword master?” “Not for some time now, sir. Do you think you can use an extra hand? Inexperienced though it may be.” “Oh, I expect we might find something for you to do. William, hand the man a brush. Do ya think he remembers what real work is? Perhaps we might remind him.” The crew joined in Jacques’s hearty laugh. “Start over there, boy.” Beginning to swab the hot tar on the hull, René grinned. “’Tis good to be back, sir.” The hot summer sun beat down upon the sea. René stripped to his breeches. The work was repetitive, but the hard exercise felt good after so long. Muscles rippled across his shoulders and arms. He still remembered the uneasy looks he had received on his first voyage after standing out on the yardarm during a gale. Twelve years old and twenty feet from the crow’s nest, he had challenged the power of the storm as if the ship were not pitching from starboard to port with sails snapping like musket fire. For a short time after the storm, the men made hand signs to avert the devil whenever he walked by, for sailors are a superstitious lot. The Poulé’s crew had never come across anyone who could root himself so strongly to a spot that it became nearly impossible to move him. The Maestro had taught him to connect to the energetic center of the earth. Once aligned with that force, it mattered little whether he was on the ground or sixty feet in the air perched on a yardarm. After a time, the crew’s uneasiness passed. René had worked hard to gain their respect and was grateful when they welcomed him into the ship’s fold. The day spent applying pitch to the Poulé’s hull passed as days will when employed in honest labor. As the sun’s light waned, Jacques called a halt to the work, and the men prepared to return to the dock. “What do you say, Worm? Will you stay with us tonight and try something stronger than the watered wine you enjoy at home?” “I hoped you would ask. I am loathe to leave work undone.” René smiled. “Oh, ’tis the work is it?” Jacques got out through his laughter. “Your father’s offices are along the way. We will stop and let him know.” CHAPTER EIGHT BORDEAUX’S SOCIAL calendar included a never-ending list of soirées and concerts hosted in the salons of the wealthy. Martin and Clarisse joined the small group of people invited to hear the latest quartet on the circuit. Clarisse glanced around at the guests. The audience, which numbered close to thirty, sported enough gold and silver trim that the gilded chandeliers looked dingy by comparison. Martin surveyed the glittering company and then turned to Clarisse. “I am to accompany my father to Amsterdam. The king is sending the Marquis de Pomponne as his ambassador, and he in turn requested my father join him as his secretary.” “And your father has asked you to assist him?” “It appears I am finally ready to be given some larger responsibility. The thought of being part of discussions that will affect so many is quite exhilarating.” Clarisse smiled. “A small part.” “Well, of course a small part. They have yet to discover how brilliant I am!” “What will your duties be?” “Most likely keep my ears open and my mouth closed.” Martin laughed. “Still, one must begin somewhere, and I am eager to watch the negotiations. ’Tis a chess match with huge sums at stake.” “As long as they postpone the next war.” “Do you think we will soon be at war again?” asked the man who was eavesdropping on their conversation. It was apparent, he hoped to hear the father’s opinion through the son. “I think it closer to the mark to ask will we ever not be at war with someone,” replied Martin. “Still, war has its uses, I suppose.” Clarisse’s eyes narrowed. “And what exactly does that mean?” “As much as I am against war, and you know that I am, it does seem to have a salubrious effect on business. Through that, it supports as many people as it destroys. At least in theory.” “Some theory. Explain that to the mothers, sisters, and daughters. Somehow, I do not think your logic will be much appreciated.” “Logic does not care. Remember, I am not in favor, just trying to look at it dispassionately.” “I think we should change the subject, as you are sinking deeper into the mire with every dispassionate statement.” Martin laughed. “René failed to find my logic convincing as well.” “Where is René?” Clarisse bit her bottom lip. She had asked the question a bit too quickly. Martin squinted as he studied her. He paused for what seemed an eon. The silence finally drove her to speech. “I was curious, since he is usually around.” “Do I detect a hint of more than casual interest in René? Should I be jealous?” “We are not exclusive. What right do you have to be jealous?” Clarisse turned away to cover the flush spreading across her cheeks. Composing herself, she again faced Martin. “I am sorry, Clarisse. You know me, I am not territorial.” Martin made a poor attempt at a laugh. “Forgive me, dear friend. It must have been something left over from your previous discussion of the merits of war.” She pulled him into an embrace. “I merely wondered where he has kept himself, ’tis all.” “Working on one of his father’s ships down at the port.” The silence lengthened, but just before it became uncomfortable, it was interrupted by the sound of a bell. Martin took Clarisse’s hand. “They are calling the quartet together. Let us find our seats.” At the conclusion of the performance, Martin and Clarisse made their way to their host and hostess to thank them and take their leave. Clarisse gave Martin a gentle push as they waited in the line to make their exit. “Find a way to speed this up. If I do not laugh soon, something is sure to burst.” “I feel the same way.” Martin struggled to keep his face fixed in a smile. “When old Gustave let out that fart right at the end of the music crescendo, I thought I would fall off of my seat. But father would murder me for a faux pas like that.” They reached the front of the receiving line, tendered gracious goodbyes, and all but ran for the door. Once outside, they both collapsed against the side of the building laughing. “It was so musical.” Clarisse wiped her eyes. “You could tell he was a real lover of good music.” “And sausage,” added Martin laughing. “Definitely sausage.” “My, oh my, something must be funny,” Victor said, as he and Maurice walked up. “We were passing by and heard the mirth. Since I am sorely lacking any humor this night, perhaps you might share the joke with us?” An icy feeling grew in the pit of Clarisse’s stomach. “Come, Martin, I need to get home.” She pulled Martin in the direction of the carriage. Maurice moved to block their path. “Let it go, Victor,” Martin said. “I am satisfied concerning what happened at the costume soirée.” “Either you are more of a coward than I thought, or she failed to tell you.” Clarisse yanked on Martin’s arm. “Come on Martin, let us leave. Now. Maurice, get out of my way.” “Non. Clarisse, what did you not tell me?” “Nothing.” Her heart threatened to burst from her chest. “Just a stupid prank from stupid boys. Come on, I need to get home.” Clarisse pulled Martin’s arm again. Martin remained where he stood and faced Victor. “What are you talking about?” Victor’s flabby lips curved into a sneer. “Why, our little tryst during the intermission at the opera. You were so uncooperative, my dear. Poor Maurice has a black eye.” Martin turned to her. “Clarisse, what tryst? What did he do?” Clarisse stood frozen. Though a warm summer evening, her skin had grown cold. She tried to speak, but no words came out. “Did he hurt you?” Martin asked, his voice harsh with rage. She forced herself to be calm, even though death’s face leered at them on this sidewalk. “It was nothing. Just a harmless prank. I managed to give them both something to remember me by.” “That she did,” Victor said, rubbing his groin. “You were lucky this time. But not next time, whore.” Martin slapped him. “You will give me satisfaction, monsieur. Though you have no honor, I am certain you will meet me. May I assume Maurice will act as your second?” Victor smiled as he reached up to touch his face. “You may, and I accept with gratitude. I have longed for this moment ever since the night of the masque. Did you think that you and Gilbert would get away with your insults? Oh, oui, I will catch up with that coward as well. He cannot hide forever. ’Tis unnecessary to have your second contact Maurice. Tomorrow in the usual field, at dawn, and swords will do fine. I will be there. Will you?” “Tomorrow
 at dawn,” said Martin. “Mademoiselle du Bourg.” Victor’s smile grew wider as he tipped his hat. “Come Maurice, they need to spend some time worrying about tomorrow.” Victor and Maurice sauntered away down the street. Their laughter echoed off the building’s granite walls. Clarisse turned to Martin. “You cannot meet him tomorrow.” “What would you have me do? Where would I live with the level of humiliation he would be certain to heap upon me?” “It matters not where. Your life is more important. S’il vous plait, call this off, Martin. You know you are not an accomplished swordsman.” Her entire body trembled. Martin put his arm around her. “I will send Louis to speak with Maurice. Perhaps we can limit the duel to first blood. There are many things I have yet to experience in this life. I have no wish to die, but I do not see a way out. Come, let us get you home. Merci, ma chère, for trying to protect me. I understand why you failed to tell me. Unfortunately, fate does not always ask our permission for its offerings.” He helped her into the carriage and then took his place beside her. The ride to her home was somber. Clarisse spent the time holding onto Martin while her mind raced. When they reached the du Bourg château, they waited for the servants to open the wrought iron gates. The Devereaux’s chauffer drove the carriage beneath the arch and into the cobblestone courtyard. Martin got out and held out his hand to Clarisse. After he helped her down, she hugged and kissed him. “We will find some way out of this.” Martin held her by both arms, forcing her to look him in the eye. “I want your promise you will not come to the field tomorrow morning.” “But, I…” she sputtered. “Your promise, Clarisse. Having you there would hurt more than the sword.” She sagged in his arms, and he pulled her close against him. “I promise,” she whispered through her tears. “Bonsoir, Clarisse.” He hugged her once more then turned and climbed into the carriage. “Louis, home s’il vous plait.” CHAPTER NINE Château du Bourg, Bordeaux, France CLARISSE RACED up the staircase and into the château. “Father,” she called out as she ran through the entryway, narrowly avoiding a collision with the footman. “Where’s my father?” “In the study, mademoiselle.” The servant jumped out of her way. She flung open the study doors and came to an abrupt halt. Her father dropped the book he had been reading onto the side table and stood at her precipitous entrance. His whole demeanor was one of censure. Edmund du Bourg refused to accept less than appropriate behavior in his daughter. Without propriety and manners, civilization—as he defined it—would fall. And though he and his wife had done their best to instill a gracious demeanor in Clarisse, her behavior had often left the qualities of quiet and demur to be desired. “Clarisse?” His voice was filled with disapproval for the most unladylike way she had barged into the room. Thick, dark eyebrows lowered as he regarded her. Realizing her mistake, as well as the wall he erected when he was disappointed in her comportment, Clarisse stood still and collected her thoughts. Her father demanded thoughtful behavior and speech. She spoke quietly, “Father, Martin has been forced to challenge Victor to a duel.” In the space of a heartbeat it was clear he understood the situation and his expression filled with compassion. “Be seated, Clarisse.” His voice echoed his concern. He gestured toward the chair facing him. “Father,” she said, louder than she intended. She paused, forcing down the molten fear that threatened to erupt within her. Collected, she continued, her voice quieter, measured. “Father, there is no time. We must do something before dawn tomorrow.” “Sit down, Clarisse,” her father commanded. She dropped onto the edge of the chair. “Have you asked Martin to forgo the duel?” “Oui, and like some idiot primate he explained that he could not live here with the embarrassment of being called a coward.” “And you responded with something like…‘so move somewhere else.’” “You already know his answer to that. We have to do something. He does not stand a chance. Victor wants to kill him. As the challenged, he has the choice of what will satisfy him, and he will never accept first blood.” Her voice broke as a sob escaped. “Like all young men, Martin is unable to see beyond appearances.” Her father paused. “He could hire an alternate. But if he did, Victor’s response would be the same as if he had declined the duel.” He leaned forward and took her hands in his. “Clarisse, ’tis the times we live in. Duty requires I inform Martin’s father, but I know Adam, and he knows his son. Nothing short of keeping Martin in prison will stop this duel from happening. The law will not let us stop something illegal before it has occurred.” “Then act illegally. Hire someone. If Victor is still alive by tomorrow morning, Martin will die.” “Would you have me do that?” “In a heartbeat,” she replied hotly. “One Martin is worth a thousand Victors, a million. I would do it myself if I could.” “I cannot.” He stood. “I will, however, contact Arnaud Cloutier. A court physician, Dr. Cloutier is in town to speak at a medical conference. He is an old friend, and I am certain he will be willing to accompany me tomorrow.” “You would attend the duel?” She jumped up and hugged her father. “Oh, merci, Papa.” “Clarisse, if there is any way I can protect Martin, I will, but he is above the age of consent now, and I cannot go against his wishes.” Sadness and truth shone in his dark eyes. In that moment, her hope died and instead became a black abyss sucking her in. Non! I refuse to give in to hopelessness. I will contact René. He will think of something. She started toward the door, stopped, and then turned back to her father. “Papa, may I take a carriage to Château Gilbert? I need to tell René what is happening.” “Change into something more appropriate, and I will alert Alfred to bring the carriage around,” he said. “Have faith, Clarisse.” “I would rather know how to use a sword,” she muttered as she dashed to her room to change. Clarisse ignored modesty and jumped out of the carriage as soon as it stopped in front of the château. She ran toward the entrance. “René!” she called, banging on the door. “Propriety be damned. René, hurry.” Henri opened the door, She barged right by him and into the foyer. “René!” she called again. “He is not here, Mademoiselle du Bourg.” “Where is he?” she demanded. “He was working on the Belle Poulé and probably decided to stay over at the port. I could send someone to fetch him in the morning, if ’tis important.” “Henri, ’tis urgent. I need to see him tonight. S’il vous plait, saddle me a fast horse. I can be at the port in two hours, and he can be back here in another two. ’Tis almost midnight. We have barely enough time.” “Mademoiselle, Monsieur Gilbert is also absent. I cannot authorize your riding alone to the port.” “Henri, would you let me ride if I might save René’s life?” “Is there truly a life in jeopardy?” His gaze bored into her. “Oui,” she said. “Martin and René may both die.” “John will saddle a horse for you. Orion’s the fastest, but he nicked a foreleg. Marc will go with you. He is a good rider. Probably not as good as you, from what René tells me, but he will keep up and he knows the port. S’il vous plait, wait in the sitting room while I arrange for the horses.” Henri left and returned a short time later. “Come along, mademoiselle. We are ready.” He guided her outside to the stables where Marc held the reins to the horses. “Merci, Henri,” she said, as he helped her mount. “Where will I find him?” “The Belle Poulé’s crew usually stays at the Gull. He will be with Jacques Coudray, and everyone at the port knows Jacques.” “Do not worry, mademoiselle, we will find him,” Marc added. “I know the port like the back of my hand. Lord knows I have delivered enough supplies there.” The ride was endless. Although there was a full moon, the road soon blended into a gray sameness. The Gilbert mount had neither the stamina nor the speed of her horse, and she had to force herself to manage its pace in order to coax the most out of the animal. Finally, lights from the port came into view as they cleared the last rise and started downhill. Marc pointed toward the longest quay. “The Gull is to the right and down a ways.” The weathered name on the tavern was unreadable, but the carved seagull perched on the sign was enough to identify the inn. Both horses stood blowing, completely lathered. “Mademoiselle, we need to find someone to walk them and rub them down.” “We need to find René first and then we can tend the horses.” They entered the Gull, still busy despite the hour. René and the Poulé’s crew were not in the tavern. “Can you tell me where the Belle Poulé’s crew is drinking tonight?” she asked the portly proprietor. “Jacques and the boys went to a party, but I will be daft if I can remember where,” he said, scratching his bald head. Clarisse prompted him, forcing herself to maintain an even tone, “Think, monsieur. ’Tis important.” “I am certain they mentioned a tavern. Name of a bird I think.” “Do you know how many taverns in this port are named after birds?” Marc asked. The innkeeper started to laugh. Clarisse glared at him. “Pardon, mademoiselle. There are many, and I am sorry I failed to pay attention. Since they were not drinkin’ here, where they took their money was their business.” He raised his voice to carry across the tavern. “Any of you know where the Belle Poulé’s crew is drinkin’ tonight?” There was a lot of head shaking, but no one answered. “Come, Marc. ’Tis almost two thirty. René does not have Orion to get him back when we do find him.” She grabbed his arm and tugged him out the door. “All right. You take that side of the street, and I will take this one. We will meet at the other end of the port.” She started up the
 street. “Mademoiselle, I cannot let you go off by yourself in a port! You will be robbed— or worse.” Clarisse faced him. His gaze faltered and then retreated from hers. “I will take this side, you take the other.” He nodded and then darted across the street. An hour of trawling taverns passed before they found the Poulé’s crew, singing in the Raven. Explaining to René took thirty seconds, but since both of their horses were blown, getting him a serviceable mount wasted another half hour. She kissed him before she let him go and watched as he urged the horse to a full gallop, disappearing from view as he topped the first rise. “Come, Marc. We need to see our horses cared for, find fresh mounts, and return to Château Gilbert.” She took a step toward the stable and then paused. She glanced back at the road and the dust sent into the moonlight by René’s horse. Mon Dieu, let him be in time. CHAPTER TEN RENÉ HAD never been fond of drink. Previous unsuccessful experiences with excesses of brandy had kept him from joining the crew in their cups. He was nearly sober when he mounted, and riding full-out finished the job. He more than once wished he had Orion under him and was painfully aware that before the night was over, he would probably kill this horse. René’s time on the Poulé had taught him to read the stars, and as they moved across the sky, time slipped away. If only the horse moved faster or the sun slower. At least thirty minutes from the field when the pink colors of false dawn lit the horizon, he prayed they had spent some time talking, and hoped against hope they would enact all of the formalities of the duel slowly and to the letter. Leaning over the horse’s neck, he urged the mount faster. He raced the sun, and he was losing. René left the road following a well-worn path through scraggly brush and weeds. Enough horses had trampled the path that he was able to hold his mount to a gallop. From the edge of the scrub, the land was a series of hills punctuated by quadrangles of flatland. As the horse struggled to ascend the final rise, a group of men came into view. Only one of them wore the customary white shirt. Duelists wore white so that first blood would be easily identified and the contest ended. According to Clarisse, it was doubtful Victor would have let Martin off that easily. The horse was blown, finished off by the last rise. It stumbled and then went down. René kicked free and jumped before he was trapped beneath it. He rolled to his feet and ran, leaving the quivering horse to die where it foundered. As he approached the group, Martin was lying on the ground, attended by a physician. Edmund du Bourg stood nearby. Victor spoke to Maurice, his face a mask of boredom and contempt. Ignoring Victor and Maurice, René ran to Martin’s side and knelt. “Will he live?” he asked the physician, who had stopped ministering to Martin. The doctor turned to René and shook his head. Blood covered Martin’s shirt, seeping from a dozen wounds, while only a few spattered drops of his blood marred the pristine white of Victor’s shirt. Martin was still conscious. “Protect Clarisse. He means to hurt her.” Martin’s voice was a rasp, blood bubbling out of his mouth with every labored breath. “With my life. I swear. But you will protect her yourself.” “I do not think so.” “Do not talk like that. Stay with us. Clarisse needs you.” René looked frantically to the doctor whose expression brought the moment into hard, cold focus. Martin gripped René’s arm, pulling him nearer. René leaned down, his ear close to Martin’s mouth. “Clarisse is awful at hiding her emotions. I saw in her eyes at the Moor. She has chosen you,” he whispered. “She loves you,” René insisted. “Martin, Clarisse loves you.” “Take care of her, mon ami. She is worth everything. S’il vous…” Unable to speak, Martin offered a weak smile. With a last breath, his hand released René and fell limp to his chest. Blood continued to seep into the hard-packed clay. René fell back to sit beside Martin. His eyes burned with years of unshed tears. Martin had been his best friend for as long as he could remember. They had shared everything but René’s training with the Maestro, which had been a sworn secret. If only he had not been singing at the Raven, or if Orion had been healthy, or… The Maestro’s voice sounded in his ear. Do not spend a moment’s time or energy on what could have been. You will need that time and energy for what is. Maurice leaned over, his face close to René’s. “Coward’s tears are cheap, Gilbert. At least your friend held a sword. If only briefly.” René took one last look at Martin and then stood, entering that state of quiet potential where power resided. Even the elements around him accorded him courtesy as the movement of the air stilled. His focus narrowed and, for him, time slowed. Ignoring Maurice as though he did not exist, he turned to Victor. Like a lion gazing on a wounded buffalo calf, René’s focus was total. For a brief second, Victor’s bored expression changed to one of apprehension. Then his sneer returned with all its customary disdain. “Do you even know why you needed to kill him?” René asked, his voice dead quiet. Victor shrugged, a simple movement that displayed the depths of his evil. “Gaspard, you are an ass,” René said. “A small, frightened boy who needs to hurt others to shore up the constant fear that he will be found out. You are a stain upon the fabric of life, a cretin, a breeding mistake, and you have reached the end of your timeline. I find I cannot allow you to continue hurting others. Is this a sufficient insult, or are you so stupid you need me to slap you with a glove?” Victor was stunned into speechlessness. “Is this some kind of joke, Gilbert? I will not be accused of murdering an unarmed man.” René leaned down and picked up Martin’s sword with a hand meant to hold a sword of its caliber. “I believe this one will do fine.” Monsieur du Bourg, stepped in and grasped René’s arm. He looked gray. “There has been enough bloodshed this day. S’il vous plaît, do not add to it. Clarisse will be stricken as it is, and she will need you.” “Merci, monsieur, for your concern, but there are times that we cannot let pass if we are to call ourselves men. I do not refer to the ridiculous notions of honor, but to the fact that we have in our midst a poisonous serpent. You do not leave such a dangerous thing within your house to endanger those you love. You crush the life from it. You must trust me that this will not go as everyone expects.” “As you wish, monsieur. You are above the age of consent, and I may do nothing but watch.” Monsieur du Bourg’s expression mirrored the sorrow and futility in his voice. René turned to Victor. “You are the challenged party and as such may choose the weapons and the level of the duel.” He loosened his cloak and allowed it to fall to the ground. He removed his cravat and opened the first two buttons on his shirt to expose his chest. Victor smiled. “I choose swords. We fight until one is dead or unable to continue.” “Are you certain that those are the rules you choose to abide by?” “Where do you find such spleen, Gilbert? Are you stupid? Let me reaffirm my choice. The contest will continue until one of us is either dead or completely incapacitated. Do you need me to define each word? Your lack of respect for your betters irritates me. You may run crying from the fight now.” He laughed, and Maurice quickly joined in. “Monsieur du Bourg, will you act as my second?” “I will, monsieur,” he replied formally. “And have you gentlemen heard and understood the rules Victor has chosen to be bound by?” asked René. Both Monsieur du Bourg and Dr. Cloutier responded, “I have.” “Maurice, will you show me the boundaries that have been marked out?” asked René. “What boundaries? There are no boundaries, little boy. It would not matter if there were. You will not last long enough to reach one.” René turned to Victor. “Will you allow me to loosen up? I have had a long ride.” “Get as loose as you want. ’Twill make no difference.” Every sword is different, as every person is different. Take a moment to acquaint yourself with a new weapon and it with you. René lunged forward, stretching out the long muscles in his left leg, and felt the balanced weight of a fine sword in his hand. Coming back to en garde, he moved the sword quickly through its paces until he felt confident in its balance. He had chosen to fight using his right hand. Even though Victor did not warrant it, Martin’s sword did. René walked over to stand in front of Victor. “En garde, monsieur.” René’s awareness expanded to encompass everyone and everything on that field. He knew the hard packed clay, the direction of the sun’s rays and the slight wind that blew from the north, and he knew precisely where Maurice stood. Victor let the moment lengthen and then languorously stretched, coming to the en garde position in a desultory way. “I am nice and warmed up after my duel with Martin— and I use the term loosely. He…” Victor lunged forward in an attempt to surprise René with a thrust. René had not been surprised by a dueling move for many years, but Victor was unaware of that fact. René parried the thrust easily. As he circled Victor’s blade there was a rasping sound and then the blade was on the ground. Victor stood there perplexed, a look of disbelief on his face. René leaned over, picked up the blade, and tossed it to him. “You need to hang on to this if we are to duel.” Victor exploded in anger. A cut, a thrust, and again that rasping sound—and his sword lay there in the dirt. René leaned down once more to pick up the sword, never letting his eyes leave Victor. Again, he tossed the sword to Victor, smiled, and shook his head. The other men stood rigid as if frozen in disbelief. Victor paused, his expression no longer feigning boredom. He began to fence seriously with René,
 attempting to use his superior weight and height to wear down his opponent. The impossibility of the situation washed across Victor’s face as if something dark had slithered across his soul. René easily blocked a tip cut aimed at his wrist and in return flicked the sword into Victor’s left shoulder. Blood trickled down his arm. Gaspard disengaged with obvious relief. A good swordsman would first try to disable his opponent’s sword arm. To attack the other was evidence of inexperience—unless of course your intent was to lengthen the contest. Victor tried a feint to bring René’s sword out of line. Refusing the feint, René sliced off a piece of his right ear. Blood flowed copiously from the wound, but it was still not debilitating. Victor disengaged again. There was absolute silence. Every man there—except Victor—saw that René had purposely chosen a lesser strike than the one offered by Victor’s feint. “What is the matter, coward? Can you not bring yourself to take a better thrust?” Victor sneered. René ignored the verbal taunt. He reached through Victor’s defenses and cut a piece from the other ear, quickly followed by a stripe down the left cheek. Gaspard glanced over at Maurice. As Maurice took a step, Monsieur du Bourg drew a flintlock pistol from his sash. “If you take another step, I will blow your head off.” Fear and bewilderment flashed in Victor’s eyes. His face was a ruin. Like a wounded bull, his world had narrowed to René’s sword. The ugly rasp of steel on steel rang out as Victor’s sword again fell into the dirt. René leaned down, wiped the blood off the hilt, and tossed it back to him. Again and again, his blade a gray blur, he speared through Victor’s defenses to cut him. And still he refused to touch Victor over the eyes so that dripping blood did not block his sight and force a stop to the duel. Gaspard disengaged again and stood there panting. His left arm, its tendon severed, swung useless. Victor’s actions had required his death. That René had pro-longed the duel, slicing away the very humanity of another soul, filled him with a grasping darkness that threatened everything he believed in. Raising his gaze to meet Victor’s, René once again saw the implacable visage of an ancient Egyptian general. Recognition that echoed down thousands of years exploded within his mind and then faded along with the visible form leaving in its place only a weary futility. “Let us finish this, Victor.” Victor’s sword slowly came to en garde. René feinted, a high thrust to the face. As Victor sluggishly attempted to block, René slid his sword three inches into Victor’s stomach. Victor dropped his weapon, but René heard no inner shout of victory. Some almost-memory deep within his soul had demanded one last cruelty. A stomach wound was always fatal, but it allowed hope to bloom, and then only pain, while the wounded prayed for death. Victor crumbled to the earth as Dr. Cloutier hurried over to him. René lowered his sword and stood quietly. No one spoke. The physician did his best to staunch the bleeding and bind up Victor’s wounds, but every man there knew that he was dead. Maurice took a step toward René, his face a red mask of rage and fear. “You bastard. You killed him. You are still a coward and I challenge you.” “Calm yourself, Maurice,” René said, his voice quiet. “I will not duel with you, no matter what you say. I have no wish to kill two men this day. One is more than enough.” “Coward. You are afraid to face me. Dung eating peasant. All of Bordeaux will know you to be a coward.” René ignored Maurice and turned to Monsieur du Bourg. “Am I finished here, sir? I would like return to the château. Clarisse is waiting.” “There is nothing more to be done here. The duel is over, and we will see Victor returned to his home. René, you know there will be repercussions from this duel. Even though it met the requirements of tradition, the Gaspards are too powerful for this outcome to remain unanswered.” “It will be what it will be. As the universe has cast my vows in my face, I will make do with what fate offers me.” René was unable to keep the weariness from his voice. As René turned to leave, Maurice pulled his sword and thrust it toward René’s back. Faster than the eye could follow, René turned enough to allow the sword to plunge past his chest. A swift scrape of metal, and Maurice’s sword was in the dirt. “I can see there is another serpent here,” René said. “One who will stab a man in the back. All right Maurice, you may have your duel.” He tossed the sword back to Maurice. “Monsieur du Bourg, may I have the honor of your seconding me again?” “Maurice, this is madness. You have seen the skill of this man. You cannot hope to defeat him.” Ordinarily a man of great energy, Monsieur du Bourg stood smaller, tired, empty. “Never. It was only luck. Victor was tired from his first duel. I am not tired, and luck does not last forever,” Maurice yelled, the vein in his neck pulsing with malice. “Will you fight to first blood, then?” asked Monsieur du Bourg. “Non. I will fight the same duel Victor fought.” “And you will die the same way,” Monsieur du Bourg muttered under his breath before he announced that the match would last until one party was either incapacitated or dead. “One last chance, Maurice,” René said. “I will not play with you, nor will I stand here a minute longer than I have to.” “En garde,” screamed Maurice, as he lunged forward. René nudged Maurice’s sword out of line and slid Martin’s blade through his heart, killing him instantly. Maurice fell to the ground, his face, a rictus of disbelief. René turned to Monsieur du Bourg. “I will be at home if I am needed,” he said, each word filled with regret. “And I will see Clarisse home safely.” “Merci, monsieur.” “I must borrow Martin’s mount and will see it returned to his stable.” With that, René swung atop Martin’s horse, recognizing the saddle Martin had used on their recent ride—a ride impossibly distant now. CHAPTER ELEVEN THE WEIGHT of death sat heavy upon René’s shoulders. Along the tree-lined drive of Château Gilbert, a few leaves had begun to redden, but in this world, at this moment, there was no room left for color or beauty. Clarisse waited within, and he dreaded telling her what had happened. How he had failed. As he approached the manor, a pressure in the pit of his stomach built, and the feeling of dread expanded. With it came a surprising nostalgia for his early years with the Maestro. Dread was not a welcome emotion, but it was familiar, just one of the many faces of fear. The Maestro had taught René how to manage fear and right now he needed that strength. He rode into the yard, heading for the stables. “John?” he called. “In here.” John answered as he walked out to greet René. “Would you prepare a carriage for someone to take Mademoiselle du Bourg home? I will need a mount saddled as well.” “Oui, Master René.” John reached to take the horse’s bridle. René dismounted and handed the reins to John. The walk to the manor seemed endless, every step heavier than the last. “Henri?” he called, then forced himself to continue through the entryway. Henri appeared before the sound of René’s voice faded. Although the man’s posture was as correct as always, tension was evident in every muscle. “May I take your cloak, sir?” “Where is she?” René removed his cloak and handed it to Henri. “Mademoiselle du Bourg is in the sitting room. There is a brandy decanter on the table,” Henri seemed to take great care to fold the cloak, never taking his gaze from René. René walked into the sitting room. Clarisse was seated, staring into the fire. He was still for a moment, unable to share the pain of Martin’s death with anyone, especially her. Some sound caused her to glance up. She stood and took a faltering step toward him. In an instant, René was at her side. He held her up and gently eased her into the chair. He knelt beside her. “I was too late.” Guilt ripped the words from his throat. Hot tears filled his eyes. Before today, the last time he had cried he was six, and all he got for the tears was a smack from a bamboo rod. Coming now, they were unexpected. He fought to hold himself together. Clarisse held his head in her arms and laid her head atop his. “’Twas not your fault. The responsibility lies with Victor. He should be punished.” “Victor is dead, or will be shortly.” He stood and walked over to the brandy decanter. “Dead? Did Martin…” “Non. I killed him. And Maurice—and even the horse. I was the Grim Reaper’s right hand today.” There was silence while he poured them both a snifter of brandy. He handed her the glass and then sat in the chair opposite her. They drank in silence as if each was trying to envision the future. “You must leave Bordeaux, René. The father is much the same as the son.” “My intention was to ship out on the Belle Poulé. Perhaps six months or a year will allow things to settle. She will be ready to sail in about six weeks. Until then, I will do my best to avoid trouble, but I refuse to hide like a frightened child.” René rose and then paced in front of the fire. There was silence again as if neither one was willing to broach the pain of their loss. Clarisse stood, crossed to René, and laid her hand on his shoulder. As he turned, they hugged. The feel of her body against his and the smell of her hair released an avalanche of emotion he had long fought. He leaned back and gazed into her eyes. A moment later his mouth was pressed against her pliable lips. She returned his kiss with a passion that surprised him. They clung to each other, stretching the moment. René took a step back and regretted the action, but he had to or lose all sense of reason. “Forgive me. I cannot handle any more guilt.” “What have you done that deserves guilt?” “I let my best friend die, I desire the woman he cared for, and I killed two men, all in one morning. Can you think
 of anything else? I might as well get it all in.” “Were you not challenged? A duel requires consent on both sides.” “Oh, they both had the trappings of a duel, but it was murder. I trained with a sword from the age of five, Clarisse. Fighting Victor and Maurice was like fighting children. Neither stood a ghost of a chance against me, and I knew it. I vowed never to kill again and I failed. Seeing Martin lying there and knowing Victor might hurt you, my vow crumbled like the hubris of a child’s sandcastle before the afternoon tide. I had to pick up the sword, and once it was in my hand, the rest was inevitable.” “He would have hurt me, René. That was why Martin fought the duel. I am sorry you were forced to kill, but you have protected me.” She reached for his arm. “As for your desire, you only echo my own.” Unable to hold Clarisse’s gaze, René turned away. “I never found the courage to tell my best friend how I felt about you. And now I never will. “’Tis strange, almost as if my emotions have been turned off. Like when I fence, but then ’tis a calm sort of quiet. This is more like a mountain of water held back by a precarious dam made of ice.” He turned and wrapped her in his arms for a brief moment. “I will not run from my emotions, but I need some time to sort this out. I told your father I would see you home safely, and John will take you. I must return Martin’s horse and sword to his family and tell them what has happened.” “But not alone, René. I will go with you and then home from there. We will get through this together.” René paused, the need to shoulder the burden himself, perhaps as penance or punishment, lessened as he gazed at her. He nodded. She took his arm as he escorted her to the door. Henri was there with their cloaks. “Your father should be home later this evening. May I tell him when to expect you, sir?” “Oui, Henri. I need to tell Martin’s parents...” René paused as grief overwhelmed him. Regaining control, he continued. “I will not be gone long.” They walked out to where John waited with the carriage and horses. “Merci, John, but I will drive the carriage. S’il vous plait, tie Martin’s horse to the back, and we will be off.” René helped Clarisse into her seat. He took his place and snapped the reins gently against the matched grays. The carriage wheels clattered along beneath the changing linden trees. When René and Clarisse approached the Devereaux manor, he was relieved her father’s carriage was already out front. They sat quietly for a moment as servants came down the stone steps to assist them. René stepped to the cobblestones and handed Clarisse down. He turned to a young servant dressed in the Devereaux livery. “Would you see that Martin’s horse is rubbed down and fed?” “Oui, monsieur.” The servant hurried to the back of the carriage to untie the horse. René offered Clarisse his arm. “Shall we? This will not get any easier.” They entered the house, allowing the servant inside to take their cloaks. “May I take the sword, monsieur?” asked the man. “Merci, mais non. I will need it a little longer.” The majordomo bowed and then ushered them into the study. Monsieur Devereaux stood behind his wife’s chair. He placed his hands on her shoulders as much to comfort her as to keep them from trembling. Defeat haunted his eyes. She moved her hand, briefly touching his before she dropped it back into her lap. Adam Devereux was a slight man who looked as though he was fighting to support an infinite weight and losing. Martin had been their only child. Madame Devereux wept softly. A small woman, and yet, in that moment, she was the stronger of the two, radiating a quiet strength, a woman’s strength, from beneath her grief. Monsieur du Bourg and Doctor Cloutier spoke quietly in front of the fireplace mantle. When her father saw Clarisse, he came over and took her in his arms, an unusual show of emotion for the man. This left René standing alone, and he looked up, meeting the eyes of Martin’s father, who walked over to him. Not allowing himself to look away, René spoke, his voice quiet, broken. “I am sorry, Monsieur Devereaux.” “Monsieur du Bourg has told me of your actions this day,” Martin’s father said. René could not maintain eye contact, and his gaze dropped to the floor as if magnetized. “I want to thank you, René. If there ever was a pestilence that needed destroying, it was Victor Gaspard. In your actions, you have perhaps saved the lives of dozens of our young men.” “I was too late to save Martin,” René said, still unable to look the elder Devereaux in the eye. “Look at me, son,” Monsieur Devereaux commanded. René looked up through eyes filled with tears. Martin’s father placed his hands on René’s shoulders. “Your timing was God’s timing, and not your own. You stood in for Martin once before at the masque and I know you would have done so again here. Were you there earlier, it would have helped nothing, for Martin would not have allowed it. God rest his soul. You have rid the world of an evil young man who debased the life God gave him. There is no guilt here, only regret. And regret is something we mortals live with.” “I would like to return Martin’s sword to you, sir.” René raised his hand to remove the sword from his belt. “S’il vous plait, stop.” The older man laid his hand on René’s. “The sword now belongs to you. Consider it a gift from Martin. I know he would want you to have it. I expect you to continue to use it to protect those never meant to hold a sword. Those of us who pick up the sword are always burned by it, but we do so anyway to protect those we love. That pain is one of the costs of love, and I can see you are a man able to make a great payment on its behalf.” “I do not know what to say.” “Your deeds have spoken. Your words are not necessary. If there is any way I can help you in this life, you have but to ask. We are in your debt, sir, and it is a life debt.” Monsieur Devereaux glanced toward his wife. “Come here, René.” René walked to her and then knelt before her chair. She put her hand on his head. “Mon petit René, how you have grown. I remember you two ragamuffins getting into everything. Stealing pies. Oh oui, I knew it was you boys. Whom do you think I made the pies for anyway? Beloved other son, we are proud you were Martin’s friend. Do you think you could visit me from time to time?” “I will soon sail on the Belle Poulé, but I will visit you often before she leaves, and when I return you will have to throw me out.” “We will pray for your safe return.” Her eyes shimmered with tears that would be shed in the days and weeks to come. “I believe the Devereaux need time to rest.” Monsieur du Bourg motioned to René and Clarisse to follow him. “Adam, Elizabeth, I will return this evening. Is there anything more I can do for you now?” “Merci, Edmund, for all you have done. We will be fine. Merci, Doctor. My wife and I are grateful for your efforts,” Monsieur Devereaux replied. “I am only sorry I could not do more, monsieur.” Clarisse hugged Martin’s mother. Then she spoke quietly to Monsieur Devereaux, after which she gave him a hug. René offered her his arm, and they followed her father and the doctor out of the study. “I will take Clarisse home with me,” said Monsieur du Bourg. “René, I can see your actions today still confuse and pain you, as they would any honest man. I advise, however, that you do not remain in this state of mind for long. I assure you Monsieur Gaspard will not. If I may put a blunt point on it, I expect him to send an assassin to challenge you immediately, or worse, attack you from behind. I have seen you fight and know you to be a master swordsman. No matter how you kept that fact hidden all these years, René, you must take up that persona now and protect yourself, for you have made a powerful enemy.” “I will take care, Monsieur du Burg, and merci.” “Papa, may I have a word with René? I will only be a moment.” “Of course, ma cheri.” The two men continued toward the front entry. René clasped her hands in his. “I will call upon you later. We still have many things to discuss.” “Oui, we do.” She gazed into his eyes, her need and grief were almost insurmountable. “We will get through this, René.” CHAPTER TWELVE Château Gaspard, Bordeaux, France THE SERVANTS carried Victor into the sitting room, where his parents and the Gaspard family physician awaited him. Victor was conscious and in great pain. A single mote of light caught the pupil of his eye, the one not completely swollen shut, and forced him to wince. Even that slight movement created excruciating pain. The doctor had selected the sitting room to treat Victor because of the meager additional light the bolt holes in its southern battlements permitted. He glanced toward Victor’s parents, but his expression held little hope for their comfort. “Is it absolutely necessary to attend him here?” his mother whined. “Be quiet, woman.” François Gaspard turned toward the doctor, his expression a study in disgust. “What is your prognosis?” The doctor’s primary skill was the ability to reassure his wealthy noble patients and to convince them of their immortality. But as he stared down at Victor’s lacerated form that skill seemed to fail him. He cleared his throat. “As you know, Monsieur le comte, these types of wounds do not usually respond to treatment, but I am well experienced and will do my utmost to—” “I asked if he will live,” “S’ils vous plait, monsieur, your son is conscious. Perhaps we can discuss his condition elsewhere?” “He was stupid enough to have failed at the one thing he was good at. I see no reason for pretense over his condition. I ask again, doctor, will he live?” The doctor coughed and went to take the father’s arm. François Gaspard glared. The doctor jerked his hand back and redirected it to smooth his neatly-trimmed beard. “I do not believe so,” he admitted. “My experience with this type
 of wound is that contagion inevitably sets in. While I have found the application of honey and boiling water to be most efficacious on other wounds, I do not have any great confidence in their application here.” “Is that a oui or a non?” asked François, his lips twisted in a sneer. “Non, monsieur.” “Do what you must,” Victor rasped in a voice rent by his screams. “I will not die.” “Of course not, mon cher,” said his mother, as she pursed overly rouged lips, her gaze resolutely avoiding the horror in front of her. “You are to be married to a niece of the finance minister himself. How else will we—” “Silence, woman.” François faced the doctor, his gaze a fiery sword. “The servants will see you paid.” With that he stormed from the room. A sick quiet filled the space, as if all pretense at humanity had somehow been leeched from the air. Even Antoinette, always deep in her own mental cocoon, appeared at a loss. “I, ah, well.” The doctor looked to Antoinette for some guidance. She drew in a deep breath and from the vapid expression on her face, it was clear she had reentered her usual version of reality. “You heard the man. Heal him.” A simpering smile returned to her face as she took on the wheedling tone of a spoiled child asking for another sweet. “But must you work in here? You see, I am hosting a tea this afternoon, and it simply must be in this room.” “Madame, if I am to irrigate his wounds, I must be able to see them. The best light is right here. We may be able to move him this afternoon, but I make no promises.” The doctor gestured to a servant. “You there, help me move him closer to the windows.” “Mother.” Victor’s voice scratched through the word, pain in each syllable. “Oui, mon cher.” she said, from her spot ten paces from the deathbed. “Closer.” She edged nearer, her gaze upon the ceiling, the floor, the doctor, anywhere but her son. “Look at me,” he said in a voice that sounded like a log being dragged through gravel. She glanced at him desperate to find somewhere to rest her eyes that would not cause her to retch. She stared at his shoes. “Look at me,” he demanded. Speechless, she at last forced her gaze to rest on his. “There must be vengeance.” “I am certain that your father…” “Promise me,” he said, fiercely insistent. Here at last was something she could understand and savor. “I promise.” “Madame, I must attend to my patient.” The doctor moved to Victor’s side. “No laudanum,” said Victor, through clenched jaws. “This will be painful, and we have the power to deaden that pain.” “I want to remember this day, each moment, so that I may—” He stopped as a wave of pain made him convulse. “—properly repay this debt. Bring me a piece of leather to bite down on.” One of the servants raced from the room. Antoinette took a deep breath and wrinkled her face at the acrid smell. “I have things to do.” She left the room, calling to the servants to attend her as she went. The doctor shook his head and rounded on the last servant. “Bring me plenty of boiling water and as large a quantity of honey as you can find.” CHAPTER THIRTEEN RENÉ DROVE up to the stables. The waning afternoon light had leached all color from the buildings, leaving only sepia shapes in the approaching darkness. John came out and took hold of one of the grays’ bridles. “How is Orion’s leg?” René asked. “He will be fine. That beast is made of iron. You can ride him in a day or so.” “A day or so,” René said, with a bitter laugh. With Orion under him, he would have reached the dueling field in time. “Has my father returned yet?” “He has. I just finished putting his tack away.” “Merci, John.” René listened to the crunch of the gravel under his boots as he walked to the château, and the creaks and sighs of the building as he made his way through the house. At the door to his father’s study, he paused, as if remaining outside might forestall the day’s reality. He mustered himself and gently knocked. “Enter.” Armand Gilbert sat at the table, his ledgers open before him. He held a glass of brandy and stared into the fire. As René entered, he stood, rushed over to René, and then embraced him. René was stunned. “Father, are you well?” “Now that you are here, I am. Let me look at you.” He stepped back to survey René. “Are you wounded?” “Non, Papa, I am uninjured.” “Sit down. Would you like a brandy?” His father settled himself in one of two deep green leather chairs placed before the fireplace. “Merci, but I have had enough brandy for one day. It just clouds the pain, and fails to remove it.” René sank into the soft leather chair opposite his father. Both were quiet for a moment. The only sound in the study was the reassuring crackle of the fire. The reflected light from the leather bindings of the books that lined the polished wooden shelves created a warm and protective space. For perhaps the first time that day, René allowed himself to relax. “Go through the events, leave nothing out, and we will decide where to go from there,” his father said. René relived the day. With his father, and in this space, he allowed himself to share his emotions as well as his actions. The Maestro had taught him the need to let out the poison within a wound to prevent its rot from spreading. By the time he finished, the fire had burned down and the room was darker, but in some inexplicable way, the space was brighter, the objects within it in greater focus. There came again a quiet moment, but this time, without the despair. Somehow, relating the story to his father had cleansed René of the self-loathing he had entertained earlier. He saw the day’s logical progression and fate or not, there was no choice along the way that he could have made differently. He accepted this now, making room for the grief and regret. “You cannot stay here.” His father stared into the flames as if he hoped to find the answers within. “I simply do not have the power to protect you. If Victor was a thoughtless bully, his parents are truly evil, and you have never heard me accuse anyone of that. François and Antoinette Gaspard are both ruthless in the pursuit of their whims. They will crave vengeance. Their wealth provides connections to the royalists and the King which make this vengeance a certainty and not a possibility. If they do not have you killed outright, the crown will charge you with an offense punishable by death—treason, most likely. Our house has an unpleasant history with the Gaspards.” He absently rubbed the stump of his right arm. “I will not stay hidden in my room.” René’s father barked a bitter laugh. “Indeed not. You will have to leave here for a time. I can see no other way.” “Where would you have me go?” “I would have you stay here, where I can enjoy watching you go through your life, but that is not to be. You must have allies. No matter how skilled you may be—and I am quite content in your skill—one man cannot withstand an army alone.” Armand Gilbert sat straighter, as if he had come to a decision. “We stay with our original plan. You will ship out on the Belle Poulé. She cannot be ready to sail in less than a month, and ’twill probably be more like six weeks, which leaves you open to the Gaspards’ machinations. The only logical place to wait out that period is aboard the Poulé, surrounded by Jacques and his men.” “I realize I have to leave, but we need some basic understanding. My convictions about killing are unchanged. I care nothing for the ridiculous idea of honor and refuse to kill on its behalf.” “That may be easier said than done. If you are challenged, you must fight to establish the fact that you are dangerous. At first, people will have doubts about the duel, given the persona you have affected these last few years. If they perceive you as being dangerous, that will cause some delay. Any delay is of advantage to us. We need time for the Belle Poulé to finish provisioning and loading her cargo. I want you to join Jacques tomorrow and assist him in preparing the ship for departure. I will expedite the loading of her cargo. You will sign on as a junior officer, and I expect you to learn everything you can. Hopefully in a year’s time you may return.” “’Tis all I have ever wanted to do. I am ready, but what about you? Unable to harm me, Monsieur Gaspard will attack you, will he not?” “Oh, most assuredly he will, but it will come in the form of a mercantile attack, and I have fended those off for almost twenty years. Gaspard will not harm me personally. To do so would be to admit defeat after failing all these years to stop my business. Still, I will pay more attention and increase my security. Perhaps I may even begin to exercise my sword arm again. At one time I was more than capable of using my left arm.” He stood and walked over to the fireplace and then held his hand toward its warmth. “Your position as my son entitles you to all of my worldly possessions when I am gone, and that is on record. I will execute a letter of credit you may access through any of the major trading companies, depending, of course, with whom we happen to be at war. Jacques will also have monies aboard you may use for trading purposes should you see a good opportunity. We have five ships in our fleet, and they will all be notified of your position if for some reason you are unable to contact me.” René stood next to his father before the fireplace. “The logic of your plan makes sense and yet leaving you still seems like running away.” René paused in thought. “I will join Jacques aboard the Belle Poulé by tomorrow afternoon, but I need to speak with Clarisse before I leave.” Both men stared into the fire, hoping perhaps to see the future within its flames. René’s demons had receded. He was sad, but the sadness could now be borne and turned into something other than melancholy. As the Maestro would say, Nothing ever ends; it always becomes the beginning of something else. Facing Clarisse tomorrow
 would be one of the hardest things he had done, but he would think of that when it came. “Bonsoir, Father. I will see you in the morning.” René turned toward the oak door. “Bonsoir, son. You did well today, and I am proud of you.” René climbed the stairs as if his feet were encased in cement, his thoughts empty, focusing only on his bed. Henri had laid out his nightclothes, drawing hot water and filling a porcelain basin for him to wash. Afterwards he climbed into the feather bed with a bone weariness he had not experienced since his days with the Maestro. Exhausted, he fell asleep and found himself floating. Disoriented, he glanced down from a spot near the ceiling. He was still in his room. The dying fire gave the room a reddened flickering aspect. There was a figure lying in the bed. He focused his attention on the figure and saw himself, asleep. When the unexpected happens, the usual human response is to allow the mind to become fragmented, desperately searching for answers instead of focusing the consciousness and allowing the answers to manifest in their own time, the Maestro’s voice whispered. He sought to take a deep breath, allowing his body to enter that state of calm, but there was no breath, and no body to breathe it, only the calm born of his intent. Another glance at the motionless form below showed a silver cord connected to the center of the body, his body. René followed the cord’s shimmering length. He had the sense that his consciousness was in some way tethered to it and unless severed, it must return him to his physical form. An awareness of movement filled his perception. He rose through the ceiling, and floated above the château, the silver cord trailing behind him. The barns and vineyards visible below were lit by silvery moonlight. There was no moon this night. The world shrank and the light about him diminished until all was unrelieved stygian darkness. Still, he sensed movement, and after a time perceived a faint distant spec of light that inched closer. Contrary to his expectation that the inexplicable nature of this experience should make him afraid, he felt buoyant, confident, as if he was returning home after the successful completion of some difficult task. Before him, a circular threshold of light grew rapidly until it surrounded him. And then he was hurtling through it, its walls a blur of brilliant pearl. After a moment of kaleidoscopic confusion, René found himself floating near the ceiling of a small whitewashed room. A young man wearing a gold belted linen kilt, bordered in green, with a golden medallion resting on his bare chest, stuffed clothing and bronze instruments into a leather bag. They were medical instruments. And somehow, René understood the exact use for each. An overwhelming sensation of familiarity washed over him. He forced himself to relax and allow the meaning of the scene below to come to him. Booted footsteps marched up the stairs followed by a forceful knock on the door. The young man ceased packing and turned to face the door. “Enter.” The door opened revealing three men in full battle armor. Although their dress was archaic, René recognized them as soldiers from ancient Egypt. The obvious leader was a head taller than the other two and heavily muscled. Swarthy with black hair and eyes, everything about the man shouted death. “Wait outside,” he told the others as he entered the room and closed the door. “Horemheb, if you have come to kill me, you did not need to bring assistance.” The young man smiled. The soldier laughed. “You speak the truth. The martial arts have never been one of your strengths.” “But you have been sent to kill me.” The smile died on the soldier’s face. “The head priest has instructed me to remove all resistance to the return of the glorious Amun-Re.” Their eyes met, and a lifetime’s worth of memories crossed between them. They had been brothers and disciples of the young Pharaoh Akhenaten since their selection at the age of twelve. “It appears you are preparing to take a trip.” Horemheb fingered the leather bag. “Perhaps I can facilitate your departure. It would be…unwise to delay.” “Is there any way I can persuade you to accompany me?” “Pharaoh has charged me to remain and protect his family.” Both men had been initiated in the mysteries of Maat and knew the larger truth, the words unsaid, for Pharaoh had taught them to perceive the energies that surrounded a man, energies that never lied. Unable to maintain eye contact, Horemheb looked away. “Gather your things. There are men waiting below to see you to your ship.” Horemheb started toward the door. He stopped and turned back to face the young doctor. For an instant, Yochanan’s brother and closest friend looked back at him and then the moment passed. “Do not return, Yochanan. The next time we meet, I must kill you.” The soldier left, closing the door behind him. “Go in peace,” the young man said to the empty room. He continued packing. CHAPTER FOURTEEN RENÉ AWOKE disoriented, his mind filled with fragments of what seemed more like memory than dream. A sense of calm purpose surrounded him. He dressed and went downstairs to find that his father had already left the château. The dining room table had been set for one, with white china dishes covered in silver warmers and a steaming mug of hot chocolate. The smell of hot porridge, sausages, warm rolls with butter and strawberry confit comforted the air. Famished, he filled a plate with healthy portions from each dish and then pulled a chair up to the table. When he finished, he sat back sipping his hot chocolate and considered what to say to Clarisse. Henri entered the room. “Will that be all, sir?” “S’il vous plait, will you ask John to saddle a horse for me?” “I was told by Monsieur Gilbert that you would wait for him and that you would ride to the port together.” “Oui, but I must do something before I leave Bordeaux. If he returns before me, tell him that I have gone to the du Bourg’s to speak with Clarisse. I will not be long, and I will come straight home.” “Your sword, sir,” Henri said offering the sword to René. “Merci, Henri.” René took the sword belt and buckled it across his hips. “I have only worn this outside the château once. I hope this day goes better.” “As long as you are going armed now, are you fully armed?” “Non, I suppose not. I will go by the armory and complete the job.” “Be careful, sir.” “I will. No need to worry.” Henri nodded and walked from the room. René looked down at the sword hanging beside him and the memories attached to it rose unbidden. “What is the killing range of your sword?” asked the Maestro. “Three to four feet,” responded fifteen-year-old René. “What if your enemy is five feet away?” asked the Maestro as he backed away from the boy. “I would move toward him.” “What if he’s twenty-five feet away and has a pistol aimed at your heart?” The Maestro moved quickly across the courtyard, pulling a flintlock pistol from his waistcoat. He turned and aimed the pistol at René. René was by now accustomed to the Maestro’s deadly surprises. Even so, this one startled him and he was at a loss for the proper response. Given the Maestro’s respect for weapons, the pistol was real and it was loaded with a real projectile. He had to act. He threw his sword at the Maestro, and dropped to the ground. There was an immediate report and a piece of the wall behind René exploded. He glanced up. The Maestro nodded, the pistol in one hand, and the rapier in the other. “Bon.” The Maestro showed a half-smile. “Right choice, wrong weapon. To throw your sword is a choice of last resort. If there is anything else at hand, throw it first, but do not bother throwing something that will not serve to distract or delay your enemy.” He then selected two knives and handed them to René. He reloaded the pistol and picked up a one-foot square wooden shield. “I am not using a full load, but if it strikes you, you will find it extremely unpleasant. Your goal is to hit me with at least one knife before I can level and aim the pistol.” The Maestro drew the pistol as he finished speaking. René had long since lost his surprise at the quickness and fluidity of the Maestro, and there were no excuses. René had only pleaded “I was not ready” once. The bruises received over that particular sentence did not allow its use again. Thunk. Thunk. Both knives thudded into the wooden shield the Maestro held over his heart. The pistol had not quite cleared his sash. “I see you understand the concept. Now, let us make your reaction automatic.” He tossed the knives back to René. In all of their practicing, the shot from that pistol never once touched René. The bridge of stone stood sentry over the Garonne river a mile or so ahead. René allowed the horse to proceed at a slow walk. He was in no hurry to face Clarisse. He had thought of a dozen ways to say what he needed to say, and each was flawed. How would she respond to his decision to run, to leave on the Belle Poulé. Most likely, a year would pass before they could be together again. He could almost hear the disappointment and anger in her voice. Two men on horseback charged out from one of the orchards that lined the road. Facing René, they stopped, blocking the roadway. Both had the hard look of mercenaries. Their weapons were well-kept serviceable tools. He continued until he was twenty feet from them and then stopped. “’Tis a nice day?” The larger man leaned forward on his pommel. “’Tis, but I have an appointment and would appreciate your allowing me to continue.” “Are you René Gilbert?” asked the shorter man whose face bore gifts from previous fights. “Excusez-moi, did I miss hearing you introduce yourself?” “There is no need for you to know who we are.” “Then I might as well remain anonymous too, since we seem to be playing some kind of game.” “Oh, we know who you are. We passed Armand Gilbert earlier
 in the day. You look a lot like him, you know,” said the first man. René entered that space of quiet and death. “Have you harmed my father?” he asked, his voice a quiet monotone. The men’s horses shied back. “Non, we have no business with Monsieur Gilbert, just you. Heard a tale of your skill with a sword. Hard to believe a boy your age could be that good. Perhaps you might show us.” The larger one pulled his rapier from its sheath. “Are we going to do this on horseback? I would hate for these blameless animals to be injured.” “How considerate,” the man said as he dismounted. The scarred man stayed on horseback until René dismounted and then slid from his saddle, all the while keeping his attention on René. “Will you consider ending this at first blood?” René untied his cloak and tossed it over his saddle. “Sorry, boy, but that is not what we get paid for. Nothing personal, you know.” “Well, I would like to avoid killing either of you if possible. How about doing this one at a time? There is less chance of your being seriously injured if you fight me one at a time.” Both men attacked, their deadly blades thrust toward his heart. “Non, I did not think so.” René withdrew a throwing knife from his waistband, and used it to block the shorter man’s sword thrust while he engaged the first. They were both veteran swordsmen which eliminated René’s compunctions when confronted by the untrained. Still, the Maestro had taught him to accomplish a task with the least amount of risk and effort. René circled between the two horses, putting a horse between himself and the larger man. He bent low, reached between the legs of the horse, and severed the man’s Achilles tendon. The overconfident mercenary screamed and dropped to the ground. René smacked the agitated horse on the rump to keep it from trampling the man to death and then walked over to where his attacker struggled to pull a pistol from his sash. René kicked it out of his hand and then faced the shorter man. “En garde, monsieur.” René moved toward him. Although a veteran in his middle thirties, the man froze, his expression one of shock at the speed with which René had disabled his partner. He managed to back up a couple of steps, giving himself time to regain control. He faced René with a determined glint in his dark eyes. “You are quite good, monsieur. You would have made a fine mercenary. Lots of money for a man good with a blade. You know—” He thrust his sword toward René’s heart. René forced his opponent’s rapier up and to the right, using the opening to tip-cut a slash across his chest. He then disengaged, giving the man a moment to feel the strike. Fear is your greatest enemy as well as your greatest ally. Allow your adversary to sample fully its bouquet. “You stupid boy, you have cut me,” the man yelled as the bottom half of his shirt changed from white to blood red. René smiled, which only increased the man’s fury. The mercenary charged René, attacking with a wild series of cuts and thrusts that were easily parried, visibly sapping his strength. The moment he began to withdraw and regroup, René attacked, slicing his foe on his chest and shoulders and then above his eyes. Each strike meant to reduce the man’s ability to fight rather than kill him. The man bled from a growing number of wounds, and with each drop of precious life force lost, he grew weaker. He attempted to gather himself for one last attack and failed. The mercenary drew back, breathing heavily. “You will kill me now, oui? Done in by a stupid boy. Well, I will not die running.” “If you yield, no one need die today.” The mercenary lunged forward with a high attack. René turned just enough to allow the blade to slide past him and then he tip-cut the tendons in the man’s wrist. The mercenary’s hand, no longer functional, dropped the blade. He stood there, swaying, waiting for the final cut. René backed up a step and sheathed his sword. “You are no longer a threat to me, and I have no need to kill you. Do those who follow you a favor, and do not pretend there were others here besides me. While I have not killed this day, I will not be so merciful if I am truly threatened.” René mounted his horse. “Oh, and one other thing. I do not like pistols or muskets pointed at me, and the moment I find one raised in my direction, I will kill the man attached to it. It would be a fatal error to be that man.” René turned his horse and took the road back to his château. If Victor’s father learned of René’s connection with Clarisse, he would kill her or worse. To keep her safe, René could have no personal contact with her. There would be no discussion of their future. “Dieu merci you are unhurt,” said Armand Gilbert as René rode up. “We were preparing to come after you. I got word Gaspard had sent men to kill you.” “Two men,” said René. “Are they both dead?” “Non, and they are no further threat. I apologize for leaving without asking you first, but you had already left. I wanted to see Clarisse one last time, to explain why I have to go away. It was fortuitous they attacked me on the road into Bordeaux. Even a dolt like me should have seen that any contact with Clarisse would alert François Gaspard and expose her to his machinations.” “I am just glad you are safe.” His father dismounted. He turned to the grooms “S’il vous plaît, take our horses to the stables. And, Marc, organize a rotating watch around the château until we leave.” Marc took the reins from René’s father.  “I will see to it, Monsieur Gilbert. No one will disturb you. It is good to see you, Master René,” he said with a smile. “You mean in one piece.” René laughed. “Merci, Marc. I seem to have become very popular lately.” “Come, René, let us walk. We have things to discuss.” The crunch of the gravel beneath their feet was the only sound for some minutes until finally, René spoke. “I am sorry, Father. I can only guess how much this troubles you. Martin’s last words to me were to protect Clarisse from Victor. If François Gaspard gets even a hint I am involved with Clarisse, he will not hesitate to hurt her. I have killed one snake only to have enraged a nest of vipers. It feels like I am running away, and yet I cannot think of a better course of action.” “Occasionally, time is the only tool we have to apply to a problem,” René’s father said as they walked into the entryway of the château. Henri rushed in, his arms thrust forward to grab René. Visibly realizing the impropriety of his actions, he came to an abrupt stop, his arms falling to his sides. “Are you hurt?” he asked, flushed. “I am fine, Henri. I believe this is the first time I have ever seen you agitated,” René said. Henri pulled his dignity back around him. “’Tis only your imagination, sir. I was checking your garments for tears. You are always so hard on your clothing.” “Ah, concern for my wardrobe. Well, that explains it,” René said. “Henri, do you think we could have something special for dinner tonight? I will be living at the port until the Belle Poulé sails, and while the port is known for a lot of things, fine cuisine is not one of them.” “Certainement, sir,” Henri turned and nodded to Monsieur Gilbert. “Will you be needing something, sir?” “Non, Henri, I expect we will be talking late, so a fine dinner will hold both of us in good stead.” “I will see to it, sir. And if I may take your coat and your cloak, I will be about it.” Henri gathered the garments and left the room. CHAPTER FIFTEEN Château du Bourg, Bordeaux, France CLARISSE PACED, then sat and picked up a book, only to put it back down. Standing again, she went to the fireplace and lifted the iron poker. She pushed at the logs, causing sparks to fly from the hearth. Replacing the poker, she resumed pacing. Madame du Bourg sat knitting, occasionally pulling on the skein of purple wool that filled the wicker basket at her feet. “If he can, he will, ma cherie.” Her mother counted stitches under her breath. “I need to know he is all right.” Clarisse’s voice rang with frustration. “Your father heard from Dr. Cloutier. Two mercenaries limped into town this morning, both bloodied and helpless. From what I have heard, I am sure he is fine.” “Maman, can Alfred drive me to Château Gilbert?” “Non, ma petite. ’Tis not safe for you to go there today.” “Alfred will be with me.” “Alfred is no man-at-arms, Clarisse, he is an aging chauffeur. I am sorry. When your father returns, perhaps he will take you.” “Zut alors!” “Clarisse!” “Pardon, Maman. I will wait for René out front.” Clarisse attempted a smile and managed to keep from running as she left the room. She went out the servant’s entrance, her thoughts in a muddle. A delivery boy stood beside his cart. She walked over and looked into the cart. It was a sturdy one-horse carriage, filled with cabbages, sides of bacon, and sacks of flour and sugar. The boy was tall and wiry. Clarisse judged him to be about thirteen. “What is your name?” “My name is Brice, Mademoiselle du Bourg,” he said. “Is there something I can do for you?” Clarisse tapped her index finger on her chin while she studied him. “Actually, Brice, there is. I need help moving something from the tool shed around back. Can you spare the time?” “Oui, mademoiselle. Yours is my last delivery today. What would you like moved?” “Go on back there and wait for me. I will just be a second.” Clarisse ran back into the château, slowing as she approached the sitting room. “Maman, I am going to Marie’s.” “I thought you were going to wait for René here?” “You are probably right. I do not think he will risk a visit. Send for me if he does. I may stay at Marie’s for dinner.” Clarisse turned to leave and then called over her shoulder. “Je t’aime, Maman.” “I love you too, dear. Have a nice afternoon.” Clarisse raced through the house and across the yard to the garden shed, a red brick building at the rear of the property that held tools and seeds. She
 pulled open the door. Brice waved from his perch on the seed sacks. Unless she needed seed, there was nothing much to move, and his worldly thirteen-year-old smile told her as much. “Take your clothes off,” she ordered, as she unbuttoned her dress. The boy was attired in brown wool breeches and hose with a white shirt and vest. Soon he was down to nothing but his sardonic smile. He sat back down and watched her. She had pulled her dress over her head and was unfastening the farthingale from around her hips. Then all she had left was her chemise. She sometimes wore linen drawers, but unfortunately not today. “Turn around,” she commanded. Pulling the chemise over her head, she grabbed his clothes and slipped them on. Thankfully his clothes were reasonably clean. Unable to completely button the tight shirt, the larger vest, probably from an older brother, helped retain her modesty. Her hair was coiffed in a braid, so she tucked it into his cap. “All right, you can turn around now.” The boy’s eyes widened in surprise. He had delivered to the du Bourgs for some time, and while undoubtedly accustomed to the peccadilloes and sexual appetites of the French upper class, this was obviously new. “I do not understand,” he said. “I need to borrow your cart for the afternoon.” Clarisse neatly folded her things and placed them on an adjacent seed sack. “I will make sure you are paid enough to get you out of any trouble you may receive.” She turned toward the door. “Wait. I cannot sit out here naked. What if someone needs a rake? They might shoot me!” Clarisse looked around for something to give the boy and then gathered her things in her arms. “I cannot go into the house to get something of my father’s. Here, wear my dress until I get back.” “They’ll shoot me for sure.” Clarisse pulled up in front of the Gilbert stables. In late summer, the heat and rhythm of the day allowed for a lengthy lunch break. Though the stable appeared deserted, John Calb would have left one groom to watch over the horses. She smiled when a young boy appeared as the rig came to a stop. “I have a note for Monsieur René.” Clarisse kept her head down and lowered her voice. The boy walked over. “I will take it to ’im, but I have to wait for the rest to come back from lunch.” “The note is from Mademoiselle du Bourg. She expressly told me I was to put it into his hands.” Clarisse coughed. “’Tis of a personal nature, and time is of the essence. You need to call René, er, Monsieur Gilbert, tout de suite.” “Monsieur Calb will skin me alive if I leave this stable.” “’Tis very important, and I will watch the stable for you. If Monsieur René fails to receive this note, Monsieur Calb will be the least of your problems. Now go!” The boy’s eyes grew wide. In a flash he turned and sprinted for the manor. Within minutes, he was heading back with René. As he approached the cart, René visibly became more cautious. He slowed, studying the young driver. Clarisse looked up and their eyes met. René stopped dumbstruck, his expression that of a man struggling to accept reality’s gift. She allowed a wicked smile to tweak the corners of her mouth. René glanced at the young boy. “Alban, they tell me you are a fast runner. Take a message to Marc. I believe he is working in the vineyards. Tell him I will need him in an hour. Have him find something for you to do, and return with him at that time.” Alban sprinted toward the vineyards as René took the horse’s bridle and led the rig into the deserted stable. “I have never been very style conscious, but I must say, you look fetching,” René said as he helped Clarisse down from the cart. Clarisse grasped his arms, her face ashen. “Two bloodied mercenaries came into town. I was so afraid you had been hurt. I could not wait.” She traced a finger along the curve of his jaw. “Are you…” “Non, I am fine. When the mercenaries attacked, I realized if François Gaspard suspected you meant something to me, he would use you to get to me.” His words poured out along with his fear. “I could not live with the possibility you might be hurt. I had to return home.” “I mean something to you, then?” A coquettish smile bright-ened her face. René reached out to touch her. The need greater than any he had known. He drew her into his arms and gazed deep into her eyes as he lowered his head. His heart stuttered when she stretched upward to meet his lips. He kissed her with all the desire he had managed to keep under control—until today, when the fire of her presence released its bonds. They clung to each other as if life demanded it. Flushed and breathless, Clarisse glanced around. ”René, is there somewhere…” Her voice came out a throaty whisper. René wrapped her hand in his. He led her toward a small room at the back of the stable, a room John Calb kept against those nights one of his horses might need his attention. The bed stood in the corner with its stitched quilt pulled tight. Sun streamed through the window and cast a golden glow across the minute space. Clarisse had removed her vest before they reached the room. She dropped it on the floor and then kicked the door closed with her heel. Blood pounded through René’s veins. To finally be alone with her, like this, was more than he had ever imagined. René gathered her in his arms, not sure if this was the right thing to do, but knowing he had to touch her, had to hold her. She opened her eyes and smiled. “Oui, René. Unable to control the emotions that tore through him, he crushed her to his chest and kissed her. Her full breasts burned through his silk shirt and all thought but her disappeared. He whisked the remaining buttons from her shirt. CHAPTER SIXTEEN Château Gaspard, Bordeaux, France VICTOR WRITHED. The all-encompassing pain overwhelmed the light of the single oil lamp. Crimson shadows danced in the corners of the room. He faded in and out of consciousness, determined to withstand the pain as some kind of atonement for his weakness. He made no sound, save for occasional grunts or labored gulps of air. His only thought was of René. Hatred so colored his internal vision that René’s image appeared to him tinged with red. Within that hatred a sound reverberated—a discordant droning, deep and without resolution. Then, from within that sound, a voice came. “You will die without vengeance.” Victor forced his eyes open, first one, then the other. There was no-one in the room. Must I go mad as well? “You are not mad,” said the voice. “But you will die, and René will live.” Victor struggled to sit up, but the reward for his effort was agony. A punctured bubble of pain from the infection eating his gut rose in a maleficent caress. He tried to scream, but his damaged vocal cords refused him even that release. Gulping short breaths, he managed to regain control. “You are only the pain.” “I am the pain, but I am not only the pain. There is a way.” “What are you?” Victor forced out the words through clenched teeth. “An older part of you that once lived long ago.” “I have never lived before. Go away.” The pain increased until a wish for death formed in Victor’s mind. “Perhaps some small proof,” the voice echoed in his throbbing head. Between one instant and the next, the pain disappeared like a candle’s flame blown out by a quick breath. Then, like a tidal wave of boiling oil, agony once again submerged Victor’s consciousness. “Take the pain away,” Victor screamed, but the agony only increased. “I am afraid the pain is necessary, if our bargain is to be struck. You will need more focus than you are capable of, and pain, supported by your hatred, is the only way.” “Will he die in agony?” Victor forced the words out past each searing breath. “With everyone he has ever loved preceding him.” “I must be there.” “I assure you that you will be in attendance.” “Do it!” Victor screamed within his mind. No sound escaped his lips. The pain’s crescendo had robbed him of breath and in that instant, his soul disconnected from the body it wore. Victor floated in a gray featureless limbo. He could think, but felt no sensations at all. The voice spoke again. Heard within his mind the words were thoughts and not of sound. “Do not be afraid. You are not dead, nor have you finished the life you chose this body for. You are merely loaning it to me for a time.” “Who are you?” Victor strove to see, to see anything, but gray sameness swallowed him. Was this real, or had he created some kind of reference to hold his sanity within? Cold terror snaked through him. “I am an ancient persona of the soul you are today. My physical incarnation took place three thousand years ago in ancient Egypt where I was a general and then Pharaoh. In that incarnation I learned the way of Maat, the way of power, and I was able to forestall the complete disintegration of the persona which occurs shortly after the physical body dies. My name then, and now is Horemheb. I have waited.” “How are you able to do this?” Victor collected himself, hoping to launch some kind of attack on the origin of the voice. “Here, let me help you.” Suddenly there appeared around Victor the golden sand of a dry desert floor. Boulders cast long shadows from a waning sun. He could smell the desert. He looked down at himself and saw his form dressed and unharmed. He knew it to be an illusion. Walking toward him was a large swarthy man, dressed and armed as an ancient warrior. Victor tried to summon anything he could use to strike at the figure but he was unable to move. Horemheb laughed. “You have no power. You never did. Your only choice was to relinquish your pain, which any child will do. Once made, that choice is irrevocable. If I ever return this body to you, it will be because I have found a better one. You have lived a short life of stupid choices, but they were your choices.” Horemheb continued past Victor and walked toward the setting sun. “Wait. You promised that I will be present
 to see Gilbert suffer.” Horemheb paused and turned. “And I will honor that promise. Until that time, then.” “Wait.” The persona that had been Victor receded into the matrices of potential, and another soul, an ancient soul, reveled in his place. I am. Horemheb commanded the body—now his body—to forestall death for a time. There would be continuous pain, but the dark arts allowed him to keep the body alive temporarily, and later, perhaps, for eternity. Fully in control of Victor’s body, Horemheb watched with pleasure as the terrified mercenary stood before François Gaspard and visibly fought to control his breathing. A muscle in his cheek twitched, its rhythm, no doubt, paired with his rapidly beating heart. Horemheb relished every moment of the man’s fear, remembering countless others who had trembled in his presence three thousand years ago. “Monsieur, I hired two experienced mercenaries. I would not have welcomed a fight against either, yet Gilbert disabled both, and from the looks of them, easily.” “I am not interested in why your plan failed. They must have been drunk. How could a boy without experience defeat men such as this?” François Gaspard glared from behind the broad pecan desk in his book-lined study. A fire blazed in the hearth, but the room remained chilled. “My son was a powerful swordsman, trained by the best. Yet he was defeated, humiliated, apparently by a master swordsman. There is more to the boy than we were aware of.” “Just so.” The mercenary breathed deeply, his body involuntarily shaking at his unexpected reprieve. Deep in thought, the elder Gaspard gazed straight ahead, through the mercenary, as if the trembling man before him had disappeared. The only value Victor’s father placed on life was in its use to him. A pig, a horse, a man, they were all the same. After a short time, his gaze once again focused on the mercenary who had managed to control his breathing, but not the twitch. “I will allow this first failure, for we have labored under incomplete information. I charge you again with killing this boy in a fashion that will ease my frustration. Use what resources you require. Do not fail a second time.” Victor’s father paused. The chill in the room deepened. “If I have to plan and execute this task myself, then I will have no use for you.” Those who were no longer useful to François Gaspard served his occasional need for amusement, his primary entertainment that of pain and its creative application. Horemheb well knew the father’s loving punishments. Victor had experienced them all his life. “I will not fail to accomplish your wishes, monsieur.” CHAPTER SEVENTEEN RENÉ NEEDED some air. Ten hours of loading cargo had taken its toll. He had been aboard the Belle Poulé for a fortnight, and under Jacques’s direction, the men shadowed his every movement. After he had inventoried each crate of wine in the hold, he asked the boatswain, Emile Lamert, for permission to go ashore. Emile always seemed to be present whenever René went ashore. There he was, all six feet of him, standing beside the longboat as they prepared to lower it into the water. Word was Lamert could lift one of the culverins by himself and had once done so to reset the cannon’s blocks in an engagement. The story was probably more legend than fact since the average cannon weighed a ton or more. Still, no one challenged the tale. Being guarded twenty-four hours a day had grown tiresome. In a moment of nineteen-year-old rebellion, René considered losing his two-man shadow. “Going in to wet your whistle, are ya, Worm?” The boatswain’s stare would have melted varnish. René remained calm and returned the boatswain’s gaze, grateful for his years facing the Maestro. “Working in the hold is dry work.” “That it is, son, but there are worse things than being in need of a drink.” The boatswain stepped closer. “Jacques has made a pledge to your father to keep you in your skin, and since he is the captain, ’tis my responsibility when his eyeballs ain’t on ya. I hope you are not thinkin’ of causin’ mischief? Cause if you are, I promise to be standin’ at the end of that road along with a world of trouble.” “I thought to have a small beer at the Gull.” René hated lying, but he was going to explode if he failed to get a moment to himself. “Have you got more work for me?” Emile hesitated. “Nah, you stood your watch. You ain’t a prisoner. The dockmaster wants to see our revised loading schedule, so I will join you at the Gull soon.” He turned to the two large sailors who were to guard René and spoke, his voice a low growl. When the boatswain spoke quietly, the crew had learned it was a damn good time to listen. “Horsehair glue will not stick to him like you will. Is that completely understood?” “Oui, Monsieur Lamert,” they answered in unison. They secured the boat, and Emile jumped onto the dock. René and his guards walked toward the Gull, which was about halfway down the main street. Along with the ever present smell of stale beer, the sounds of loud voices and smashing furniture rose and fell as they passed tavern doors. The two men were so close to René they bumped into him when he stopped short. “I think I left my cloak here. I will just be a second.” He turned into the nearest tavern. René knew this was the height of stupidity, but once he had made the decision, he completed the task. He sprinted through the back door, then down different alleyways, and continued until he was sure he had lost his warders. Coming to a stop, he leaned against the wall of a building to catch his breath. A quick drink and then back to the ship. Oh, he would catch hell, but it would be worth it, or so he thought. He chose the Trident because the crew never frequented it. The tavern was darker than the ones he had been in before, with a subdued undercurrent of dissatisfaction. René almost wavered in his decision until two men rose from a nearby table and bumped their way through the tavern to the door. He strode over and sat down. An older woman who had seen her share of life came over. “Whatta ye have, young sir?” she asked, scratching her backside. “Dinnae bother asking for wine cause we ain’t got none.” She laughed. “Not worth the drinkin’ even if we did.” “A small beer,” René said. “Will you be wantin’ somethin’ to eat?” “What do you have?” Her face cracked into a grin. “Nothin’ a bright young lad like you wants.” “Then why do you ask?” “The longer I stand here, the less time I spend lugging trays around.” She turned and walked back to the bar. Always attuned to threat, René studied the room and its inhabitants. He listened with his ears and his intuition, the latter being the more reliable of the two. An undercurrent of threat eddied through the tavern, but he was armed. This small rebellion was stupid and childish and he regretted ordering a drink. He would pay, down the beer, and return to his ship. “Here you go, love.” The serving woman plunked the tankard down on the rickety table. “Merci.” René laid coins on the table. Her face lit up, the payment being more than the cost of the drink. “And merci to you, young squire.” Her toothless smile broad-ened as she scooped up the coins, and sauntered away from the table. Satisfaction over his successful escape vanished as he sipped the bitter watered down beer. After two sips, his vision distorted and his rock solid balance faltered. Was it possible there was something in the drink? He needed air. René stood and weaved drunkenly toward the door, but his vision had narrowed, and the door looked to be a thousand leagues away. “Hey, watch out there, boy,” a voice growled right before he crashed into a table. The seated men jumped up as pewter mugs splashed their contents across the scarred wood. “Looks like the lad needs some assistance,” a voice said from the doorway of the tavern. Two men appeared, one on each side of him, and dragged René from the tavern. He struggled to fight back, but his body no longer answered his commands. “Good thing we kept an eye on all the taverns,” said one of the men to the other. René’s vision and hearing rapidly deteriorated. His last thought was of Clarisse as a dank blackness swallowed him. At first, there was no sensation at all, unless a dissociated floating counted as an impression. Then René was moving. As he focused on the sensation of movement, his apparent speed increased. The walls of a tunnel materialized around him, its poorly-defined sides shot through with a collage of light and color. The tunnel ended and the light increased and his awareness of movement slowed, until he found himself floating, once again, a disembodied consciousness. René allowed himself to sink deeper into that unique unity of focus the Maestro had taught him, and the details of the vision solidified. He sensed no threat. Somehow, he recognized where, and more importantly, when he was. He remembered. The bright sun blazed its shimmering reflection from the Nile into the northern palace. The daily sounds of Akhetaten, the Egyptian capital city, filtered into the palace despite its position on a hill overlooking the river. The hubbub echoed against the giant rose-colored marble pillars adorning the immense Hall of Audience. The Pharaoh, Akhenaten, leaned against one of the pillars as if to enjoy its coolness as he looked out upon the late afternoon sun dancing on the Nile. He tilted his head upward; his eyes focused on René, and he smiled. Welcome back. The warm voice of an old friend and teacher filled René’s mind. There was a knock on the huge doors of the chamber, and the robed vizier entered. “The esteemed general Horemheb, and the court physician Yochanan Ben Avram to see The Lord Akhenaten, may he live, prosper, and be healthy.” “Thank you, Ay,” said Pharaoh, waving away his approaching assistance. Akhenaten slowly made his way toward the royal throne, pain evident in each movement. Once seated,
 he nodded to the vizier. “Show them in.” Two men entered the chamber. Both were young in years but old in experience. One wore hobnailed sandals, which made a rhythmic clicking noise on the marble floor tiles. The other, Yochanan ben Avram, was of medium height with curly brown hair and compassionate clear brown eyes. The large gold medallion on his chest indicated that he was Pharaoh’s physician. Akhenaten studied him as he approached. A rainbow of radiant colored light sprang into being around the physician. Somehow, Akhenaten shared a higher form of sight with René that allowed him to perceive the colored light. The doctor was surrounded by a brilliant golden aura tinged with purple about his head. The strong, prominent energy system revealed years of meditation and study. A small amount of deep browns, which René intuitively understood to indicate worry, hovered close to the young man’s shoulders. There was something about him that tugged at René’s consciousness, some almost memory that struggled to return. As for being able to see the energies swirling around the physician, that skill felt normal, natural, even familiar. The general marched toward the throne. Horemheb was a giant of a man, over six feet in height, hardened and muscled by military service. One of the youngest generals, his swift rise through the ranks came as a result of his decisive victories in Nubia five years prior. His role was to protect Egypt from her many external enemies. That task is insignificant compared to the successful completion of the other. Pharaoh’s thoughts were clear in René’s mind. Akhenaten studied Horemheb with his higher sight and René sensed Pharaoh’s dismay at having chosen such a man to defend the light. Horemheb’s aura was shot through with red and black—understandable given his profession—but deeper within, he was filled with sickly reds and browns, the colors of greed and ego. He is the one who will betray Egypt. Again, Pharaoh’s thought came to René. The two men had reached the dais. Pharaoh waited as they prostrated themselves on the marble floor before it. “May the Lord Pharaoh be well, may he live, prosper, and be healthy,” said Yochanan Ben Avram, his forehead touching the floor. “May the Lord Pharaoh be strong, may he live, prosper, and be healthy,” said Horemheb. Although he knelt before Pharaoh, his posture shouted his reluctance to kneel before any man. “Rise, both of you, and follow me into my chambers. We have much to discuss and need not do so in this cavernous hall.” Akhenaten attempted to rise from his throne. Yochanan ben Avram rushed to his side and took his arm to assist him through the door at the edge of the royal dais. Walls were no impediment to René’s etheric body. He flowed into the next room and then hovered near the ceiling. The room was still large, but more intimate. Wall hangings and rich carpets softened the black marble floor. The cedar couches upholstered in golden cloth sat facing each other in one corner. Servants placed silver platters laden with a variety of meats and fruits on an adjacent table. Yochanan poured Pharaoh a glass of water. The glass was a work of art, threaded with veins of gold and electrum. “I will leave soon, and it will be up to you two to see Egypt through the times ahead,” Akhenaten said. He sipped the water. “No, exalted one, you will regain your strength and lead us yourself,” protested Horemheb. The physician remained silent. “Not this time, general,” Pharaoh replied. “I have given both of you all I know, and I confer the mantle of initiate upon you. You know the truth, and you must defend those who cannot defend themselves from the darkness that will surely come to cover the earth. This darkness is insidious. It will creep upon your thoughts like a lioness stalking a wildebeest. Only through continued vigilance and expanded awareness will you maintain communication with your Self and the larger whole. Horemheb, you will have the more difficult road to tread, for you must defend Egypt from her external enemies. Beloved friend, I know you will do your best, and I forgive you in advance for any errors in judgment you may make.” Horemheb’s eyes flashed, then he lowered his head. “Thank you, Lord. My sword will be Egypt’s defense.” Akhenaten sat back and looked at Yochanan, who met his gaze with such determination Pharaoh was forced to smile. “Beloved physician, whose understanding approaches my own, you see, do you not?” Yochanan lowered his head. “I do, Pharaoh.” “Great darkness will cover the Earth for a period, and men of good intent will despair. The light must not be lost again. The fire must be banked against that time when the kindling of love will allow it to burst forth in all its splendor. I command you to create a structure that will allow the knowledge and skill to be passed down through the generations. It must have different levels, for each man and woman may only be given that which they can accept and use. “Yochanan, I foresee your people will be a conduit for this fire down through the ages. Though it will burn them terribly, they will survive and succeed. They will be reviled and persecuted, for the darkness cannot abide the light. They will fall and forget, but there will always be a few who will carry the light.” Akhenaten sagged against the padded side of the couch. Yochanan reached for him. Waving his hand away, Pharaoh mustered the strength to continue. “Your people will soon be enslaved and forced into labor. The remaining priests of Amun-Re dread them, and rightfully so, for they stubbornly hold to the concept of the one, a truth I have tried to bring to my people. Once I am gone, the old priesthood will reclaim power, destroying the worship of Aten and all who worship the One in any form. The light will always dispel the darkness, and so the darkness is afraid.” “Will they ever be freed?” asked Yochanan. “I have spent this lifetime trying to release us all from bondage. I have failed, but I am encouraged to believe the work done will not be in vain. When your people are ready, a leader will appear, and they will begin their trek along a hard road into the future. You will do your part to make it possible for such a man to exist.” “What of me, sire?” asked Horemheb. “I charge you to protect my son and daughters, and my wife and mother. My brother, Smenkhakare, will rule along with my wife Nefertiti after I die. You, Horemheb, are to protect the succession for as long as you are able. When I am gone, the darkness will rush over Egypt like the waters of the Nile at inundation. The priests will re-establish the worship of Amun-Re, and take the people from the light of the sun back to the darkness of the temples. “Rather than fighting against the inevitable, you must protect those I have loved. You have ever been at war within yourself, General. I fear it is not a war you can win yet. But I want you to know in the fullness of time, you will succeed.” He paused. “I have grown tired and wish to rest. Know that you both have my blessing.” Horemheb and Yochanan stood and bowed to Pharaoh. “Yochanan, would you remain a moment, perhaps make me something to ease my sleep?” “Certainly lord,” replied Yochanan. Horemheb backed out and then turned to exit through the door into the audience hall. Akhenaten waited until the click of Horemheb’s boots on the marble floor faded into silence before he spoke again. “You may not remain in Egypt. It is no longer safe for you here.” “From whom am I in danger?” asked Yochanan. “The war within Horemheb will not last much longer, and it will not be won by the light. He will make a deal with the priests, for the lure of power is too strong for him to overcome. They will not abide your presence.” “Where would you have me go?” Pharaoh paused to collect his breath. “To Greece. I have ar-ranged passage for you, as well as funds for the establishment of a school there. I expect you to maintain your connection with Egypt and to find a way to instruct those here who are receptive. But this you must do in secret. In the not-too-distant future, maybe fifteen or twenty lifetimes, a new city will rise on the coast, called Al Iskandariyah. It will become a center of learning, where scholars from all over the world come together. There will be a great library, a thing of wonder. That freedom and knowledge will not survive long, but it will last long enough for the seeds you will plant there to grow into a forest that can never be completely destroyed again. In this future lifetime, you will be called upon to guard the power of the ancients.” Pharaoh took a deep, difficult breath and then another, his face wrinkled with the pain. “May I give you something to ease you?” “Thank you, but I would rather spend these last moments with a clear head. The pain will not last for long.” Akhenaten gave Yochanan a wan smile before he tilted his head to stare up at René. “Dying is easy. Living within love is hard.” He returned his gaze to Yochanan. “Do not hesitate to communicate with me when I am gone, for I will remain to help and advise you.” “If I did not know that to be true, I would quail before the enormity of the task you have set before me,” said Yochanan. “Who am I to carry the weight of the truth?” “A good man who knows enough to allow the truth to carry him.” Pharaoh reached for his water. Yochanan placed the glass into his hand. Akhenaten took a sip and then peacefully relinquished his physical incarnation. The glass slipped from his hand and shattered upon the unyielding marble floor. Yochanan sat back. The sadness on his face was laced through with fear and doubt. “Beloved Master, how can I do this?” How can you not? It is who you are, and we cannot be apart, for we are always one. Akhenaten’s voice echoed in Yochanan’s head and René’s as well. Fear cleared from the young physician’s face, replaced with a calm surety. He
 stood and walked from the room to advise the vizier that Pharaoh was dead. CHAPTER EIGHTEEN Off the coast of Bordeaux, France RENÉ WOKE to a vicious headache. The world swayed, and a wave of foul seawater washed over him, smashing him into a bulkhead. He tried to stand and banged his head against the deck above. Dark as the inside of a tomb, a scant four feet separated the two decks. He rose again, careful to keep his head above the bilge waste that threatened to submerge him. A chain ran through a ring attached to an iron collar around his neck, its nether end securely bolted to the deck beneath the rancid water. His hands and feet were also manacled, each by two feet of heavy chain. A ship under way. A slaver. As the next wave crested below his chin, the rancid smell of sweat, bile, and human waste overwhelmed his senses, making him retch. Focus on the breath. Come back to that rhythm. His breaths were shallow because the awful stench was too much to bear. He extended his other senses. Without light, his eyes were useless, but the smallest sound gave voice to the space he was in, and the movement of the water told him something of the ship’s speed and the weather and condition of the sea. He was the only one in the hold, if he failed to count the rats—and he chose not to count the rats. Deal with the moment. Take stock of your weapons. The Maestro’s advice edged into his mind. What weapons? In his mind’s eye, the fencing master’s bamboo rod flashed. Do not waste time considering what you do not have. René found his center and calmed himself. I am alive, I am uninjured, and I have all you have taught me. Someone has made a bad mistake leaving me alive. The first rule of combat: Do not underestimate your opponent. He tensed a muscle in his left foot, held it for a count of ten, and then released it. Familiar with most of the muscles of his body, he had worked hard over the years to be able to control each one, both singly and in combinations. He would be ready when the opportunity came. The strike of a wooden mallet reverberated as the hatch peg fell to the deck. The warped hatch opened a crack, illuminating the hold for the first time. René remained still. The hatch opened wider, and an intense beam of sunlight fell upon him. Even with his eyes closed, the brilliant sunlight blinded him. “Do you speak English, Frenchie?” a man asked. René nodded. “You move a muscle, and I will take this food and water away and close the hatch. Don’t know why you need to be fed, but the boatswain says you’re to be conscious and in reasonably good health so you can enjoy meeting the sharks. You got a week or so.” The man reached down into the hold and placed the bucket of slop and tin of water on a ledge within the reach of René’s chain. “What ship is this, and where is she bound?” René asked, not bothering to inquire about why or who. “None of your business, boy. You will not be goin’ far anyway.” “Merci for the food and water.” “Don’t be thanking me. ’Twould be better for you to die down here. Sharks are a bad business.” The man pulled himself out of the hold, banged the hatch shut, and knocked its wooden peg into place. The pail held the garbage left over after a meal, but it was edible and he was hungry. He might not be fed again, and he would need every bit of his strength. He ate, drank, and slept as much as the rats let him. He killed one and threw it to the other side of the hold. Did rats eat rats? Possibly, because after that, they left him alone, at least for a while. The days blended one into the next. Locked in the dark, the passage of time became unknown. The same crewman fed him once a day, but hunger was his continuous companion. He was never sure if he had eaten in the last twenty-four hours. At least they gave him enough water. Crack. A wooden mallet struck the hatch peg, its sharp retort rang through the hold followed by a high pitched screech as rusty hinges once again contested the hatch’s opening. With his eyes no more than slits, René saw the shape of a man standing empty-handed in a shaft of brilliant sunlight. From the way he stood René knew him for the sailor who had brought him food each day. Short and stocky, and built of rock hard muscle, this was not a man to have as an enemy. “Captain says for you to come up on deck for some air. If you try anything at all, ‘twill be the last time you see the sun ’til you go swimming.” He glared down at René. “Did you hear what I said, Frenchie?” “I will not give you any trouble. You have my word.” The sailor laughed. “You are something, boy. I will say that for you. You always say thank you, even though you will soon be a dead man and you know it. Now you be giving me your word. And funny thing is, somehow, I know when you give someone your word, you keep it. Simple as that. Sorry you got yourself into this trouble. I guess powerful people didn’t like their son sliced up, even if he had it coming.” He unlocked the chain that ran through the collar around René’s neck. His arms and ankles still had shackles and short chains, but he was able to stand for the first time. “Do you need help ta get out?” “Merci, but I think I can make it.” “There you go thanking me again. You’re an odd one, you are,” said the man. “What is your name?” asked René. “You surely don’t need names where you’re going, but if ’tis any comfort to ya, my name is James Bailey.” “Merci, Monsieur Bailey.” “Funny boy.” The bright sun defeated René’s first attempt to open his eyes. The joy of the light on his face surprised him. Then emotion disappeared into iron held focus. Joy held no seat in this arena. He willed his eyes to adjust. He needed every minute on deck to memorize distances, numbers, combat readiness of the men, and their morale—anything and everything that he could learn. Doing his exercises had helped, and even though he could have stood unaided, he pretended to be suffering from his stay in the hold. The boatswain, a large man with scars on his arms and face, walked over to stand in front of René. “Chain him to the mast.” Their gazes met. “Don’t look at me, boy.” He backhanded René in the face. “Look down at the deck when I talk to you. You’re some over-fed nobleman’s kid thinkin’ you make the rules. Surprised you ain’t cryin’ for your mama. You got a mama, boy?” he asked and laughed. When René didn’t answer, he hit him again. “I asked you a question, boy. Don’t try my patience, ‘cause I ain’t got none.” “My mother died when I was born.” René studied the man’s feet to see how he moved. All the while he cataloged everything in his peripheral vision. “Well, not to worry, you will be seeing her soon.” The boatswain turned to walk away then turned back and hit René again. His bitter laugh floated across the deck. “I just had to do that.” Though they had chained him in a way that forced him to stand, René had enough slack to turn and see most of the ship. He was aboard an English slave ship. She was an older carrack in design with the raised forecastle. She had seen better days, though. The fact that she was still on the seas suggested either a cutthroat reputation or an experienced captain. Under the wear, the ship was surprisingly clean, her ropes and sails newly repaired and in good order. Second rate though she might be, she was seaworthy. This was a veteran crew, competent in their tasks, and not likely to make mistakes that might allow him to escape. Escape. Even if he could, where would he go in the middle of the ocean? Do not rush fate. One thing at a time. Do what you can do. His master’s voice echoed within his head. He had to pick a fight and hope he survived long enough to create allies. The next time the big boatswain walked by, René laughed. “What are you findin’ so funny, boy?” The man stuck his face within inches of René’s. The boatswain’s right leg was shorter than his left and René doubted anyone brought that fact to his attention without regret. “You walk funny.” René called out loud and clear. There was no profit to him if he got beat up and no one knew why. All work within the sound of René’s voice stopped. Silence reigned. René had guessed right, and now he needed to survive his insight. The boatswain froze, disbelief written on his face. The disbelief changed to rage. “What did you say?” Spittle flew from his mouth. Even the captain had turned to watch. René counted on the fact that Gaspard’s agent had given the captain a great deal of money along with explicit instructions that did not include throwing a dead boy overboard. What he could not know was how close to dead the agent considered acceptable. “I said you walk funny,” René said—louder this time, so there was no mistake in his words. “Do you know what a cat is, boy?” The veins in the man’s neck pulsed. His eyes were shot red with blood. “A small animal?” René asked. There was a laugh from the men standing around the mast. The boatswain’s gaze turned like a snake seeking prey. The laugh died. Only the sea continued to speak. In the presence of death, the men remained silent. “You, James, bring me the cat. I don’t think this boy has ever seen a real one. Your education has been sadly incomplete, boy. You’ll be thankin’ me for this. I promise you.” The man’s voice was a rough whisper. “Gob, there’s no need to add harm to the kid. ’Twill find him soon enough,” said James. “Bring me the damn cat, Bailey.” James walked over and handed the boatswain the cat-o-nine-tails. He caught René’s eye and shook his head. The cat had nine sinuous thongs of blood-encrusted leather dangling from a well-worn wooden handle. “This here’s a cat, boy. As you can see, it ain’t no small animal. Now, there is a skill and a talent to usin’ a cat, both of which I am proud to say I have. You see, you need to take care the thongs don’t get all stuck together with blood and skin, which they’re wont to do. If that happens, the cat’ll take yer organs
 right out, and that’s always a bad thing. So you need to run your fingers between the thongs every couple of strokes, to keep ’em separate. I gotta tell you— as much pride as I take in usin’ the cat, sometimes I lose track. I try to keep count, but before I know it, I plumb forgot to clean the damn thing. I surely hope that don’t happen today.” “I also have a skill and a talent, and I will kill you with it,” René said in a low voice. The man hesitated, confusion written across his face. He laughed a quick bark followed by an angry shake of his head. “Pay attention, boy.” He raised the whip before René’s face, separated the thongs of the cat, and petted it in a sensual way. “Turn him around, and chain him up. You there, strip off his shirt.” A stroke cracked against René’s back, sending blood and skin flying. “It usually takes me ten or twenty strokes to get warmed up, so don’t get too excited yet.” You have my attention now. René centered himself and forced down his awareness of the pain. He counted on his estimation of the captain and Gaspard’s instructions. If he was wrong, he would be too hurt to try anything. “Two.” The whip cracked and pain sang along the bloody stripe down his back. René refused to cry out. He needed the respect of these men if he was to survive. “Three.” Crack. Blood trickled down the back of his legs. Time wavered, and he faded in and out. “Ten.” Crack. The force of the cat drove him into the mast. “Enough, Boatswain.” The master of the vessel had a stern voice long accustomed to command. “But Cap’n, I ain’t nearly finished. I was just gettin’ warmed up.” The boatswain’s voice was thick with frustration. “Part of our bonus is to deliver this boy alive to his fate. I do not intend to lose money to satisfy your pleasure, sir.” The captain was a tall, somber man with sharp eyes. He did not seem like the type of man to brook dissent. He called out to the crew, “Do any of you wish to donate your share to the boatswain’s pride?” A chorus of denials rang out, along with a few variations on “leave the boy be.” As the men dispersed one of them muttered, “That is one tough kid. Never seen a man take ten without makin’ a sound.” “Mister Bailey, unchain the boy and see to his wounds. He needs to be alive and aware in order for us to meet our commission.” The captain turned back to his work. The boatswain stood there seething. His hand twitched. Droplets of blood jumped from the sodden leather to land on the deck. He leaned close enough for René to smell his foul breath. “We have time yet, boy. You and I still have business before the sharks get ya.” René’s eyes met those of the wielder of the cat. “I have made you a promise, sir, and I always keep my promises.” The man was mute in response. “Come on, out of the way,” James said. “Orders is orders.” He unlocked the shackles that held René to the mast. The boatswain cursed and then stalked away. He glanced back once. Hatred pulled his lips into a snarl. “Come on son, let’s get you somewhere I can wash you off and put some grease on those stripes.” James helped René over to a keg where he could sit. “This is going to smart some, but ’twill do you good.” A bucketful of salt water crashed over René’s back. He almost passed out from the shock. With teeth clenched, he forced the pain into that mental box where it would wait like an evil gift for a better moment to entertain it. He refused to cry out. “I never seen a man take stripes like that,” said James. “Do you not feel pain, boy?” René laughed. A sob caught in his throat. “Oh, I feel pain all right. But I intend to survive, and screaming will not help me.” “I am sorry son, but there is nothin’ gonna help you. The captain’s a hard man, and he will do what he’s contracted to do. You may count on it.” James sponged blood off René’s back then put some kind of grease on the wounds. “’Twill either heal or ’twon’t. Not much else I can do.” The ship’s master had walked over to check on René. “Mister Bailey, will he survive?” “Not if I return ’im to the hold, Captain. That is the truth of it.” The lookout atop the mainmast interrupted their conversation. “Ship two points to the northeast.” “Where from,” called the captain. “Flag’s English.” The fact that a ship was flying friendly colors was no guarantee she was harmless. “Sound to quarters, Lieutenant,” said the captain to an earnest young man standing beside him. “Don’t open the gun ports yet, but ready the men.” “Aye, Captain.” “James, lock the boy in the small cabin, which is empty at present. Make certain there is nothing in there he can hurt himself with or use to get into trouble.” “Aye, Captain,” James said as he turned to help René to his feet. “Come on son, let’s get you below. Better quarters than you had before by a damn sight.” With his arm around René’s shoulders, James helped him navigate the deck to the hatch and ladder that led below. Getting down the ladder was a bit of a trial, but once in the cabin, René stretched out on a bunk with only his arms and ankles shackled together. “Get some sleep. I’ll check on you later.” James stopped at the door and turned. “Sorry, kid.” James closed and locked the door. René fought to remain conscious. Although his body demanded he shut down, now was not the time to sleep. He strained to listen to the comments from the men above deck. “Did you hear what the boy said to ’im?” one sailor asked, with a coughed laugh. “Yeah, I heard ’im. Ain’t never heard anyone speak to the boatswain like that,” said another. “Not and live,” said a third. “That is one tough kid there. Sorry to see him go. He’d a made a good un.” A scuffle was taking place right outside his cabin door. “Gimme the keys,” the boatswain demanded. “No. Captain said to leave ’im be,” said James. “Give me that damn key, or you will be swimmin’ with the kid,” shouted the boatswain. The ship lurched as splinters of wood exploded through the corridor six feet from where they stood. “We’re under attack,” James yelled. “We ain’t finished yet, Jamie my lad. That was a bad mistake.” The key turned in the lock, and James charged into the room. “We’re under attack,” he shouted over the din. “I ain’t got the key to the shackles. Only the boatswain has those. I will be catchin’ hell from the captain, but no one should drown locked in a box.” He turned and scrambled up the ladder. René followed and stuck his head above the hatch cowling. Aft and to the starboard quarter, a smaller ship was rapidly gaining on the slaver. Moments later, it surged alongside, as grappling irons flew over the gunwales to pull the two ships into a deadly embrace. The rigging of the new ship was Dutch. A privateer or pirate, depending on who was at war. The Dutchmen poured over the rail waving their cutlasses. He spotted the boatswain positioned behind a group of sailors. René cast about for a weapon, then climbed above deck and pulled a belaying pin from the pin-rail. A wave of agony washed over him. He sucked in a few deep breaths to settle himself and pushed down his awareness of the pain. One of the deeper cuts had opened; blood trickled between his shoulder blades. He surveyed the deck and picked out the sides. At this point, there was no telling who would end up an enemy and who a friend. Fate had presented him with an opportunity, and he would make the best of it. First, the shackles. The boatswain dove behind another group of sailors as a Dutch falconet swiveled toward the slaver’s deck. A bloody mist of bone fragments and flesh exploded as the grapeshot decimated the sailors the boatswain had hidden behind. When the smoke cleared, René and the boatswain stood face to face, separated by nothing more than ten sword lengths of bloody deck. “Thank you, Lord,” the man yelled. He ran toward René, pulling his sword free and waving it over his head. “You’re mine now, boy.” “Boatswain!” the captain shouted as the man ran from the fight toward René. “Hold. Leave the boy. You’re needed here now.” The man ignored the captain and continued toward René. He came up short when he saw René had a belaying pin in his hands. Then he sidled up toward René, smiling. “Found yourself a toothpick, did you boy? And what do ya think you can do with that?” For René, time and space narrowed. There was no Dutch ship, no din of battle, no smoke or flying splinters, only an enemy who needed to be killed. René settled into as wide a stance as his shackled feet allowed and waited. “Cat got yer tongue, boy? I would like to have more fun with you, but as you can see, I am needed elsewhere.” The boatswain laughed and thrust his sword. René turned, allowing the boatswain’s forward momentum to carry him past. As he went by, René hit him in the face. There was a loud crunch. The boatswain rose sputtering, yelling, and spraying blood. “You broke my damn nose. You’re dead. Don’t care about no bonus.” He aimed a cut at René’s head. René blocked with the belaying pin and then jabbed the boatswain in the gut with the tip. He backed away out of reach again. Doubled over, the boatswain glanced up. His eyes were glazed with blood lust. He cast about for reinforcements. There were none. “You’re damn lucky, kid, but your luck’s over. All you’re holding is a piece of wood.” He lunged in with a high feint, his true intention a disemboweling stroke. René refused the feint and caught the blade on the chain between his shackled hands. He jerked it up, and then came down hard with the belaying pin on the pressure point at the juncture of the man’s wrist. The sword came loose. René snatched it out of the air and pivoted, slicing through the man’s throat. There was a great gush of blood and an instant of total disbelief in the boatswain’s eyes as he died, crumpling to the deck. “I do my best to honor my promises,” René said to the corpse. He found the keys to his shackles and removed them. He reveled in his regained freedom no matter
 how short lived it might be. He lifted the cutlass. Shorter than the rapier and curved, a sailor’s weapon of choice, it would serve. René had not yet decided on which side to fight. Why he made his choice was forever a mystery, but he would remember the certainty that it was the right one. The captain was engaged sword to sword with a Dutch sailor. An accomplished swordsman, the captain was never in any real danger from the Dutchman. As René’s field of vision widened, another Dutch sailor appeared aiming a musket at the captain’s back. When all you have to throw is your primary weapon, be damned certain you have no other choice. His life was not at stake, and yet his muscles were already moving. The cutlass sliced through the air, spinning, catching the glint of the flames. It sank into the sailor’s chest with a distinct thunk. The captain had dispatched his opponent and turned in time to see René throw the sword. The musketeer collapsed to the deck, his musket going off as his fingers spasmed. The captain nodded to René and then waded into the fight again. René stood there for a second, once again weaponless. He picked up his belaying pin and ran over to a Dutch sailor engaged with one of the English crew. Smashing him on the head, René relieved the man of his cutlass before he hit the deck. “Merci,” René said to the unconscious sailor. He smiled at the relieved Englishman and went to look for more of his new enemy. Another Dutch sailor challenged René. The privateer’s life was measured by a heartbeat. René disarmed and incapacitated his opponents when he could, killing when there was no other choice. He had picked up a second sword and wielded both. Walking death, he began to turn the tide of the fight almost single-handedly. This was his first melee, but he was within his element as never before. The English sailors followed him as he plowed through the privateers. The Dutchmen retreated and scrambled over the rail to drop down into their ship. The privateers had used poles with pegs along their length to help get aboard the higher Carrack, and René now grabbed one. “To me!” he yelled. He leapt from the rail of the English ship, holding onto the pole as it sailed over to the center of the Dutch deck. The English crew followed him. The privateers dropped their weapons when René turned to face them. The air stilled as he walked through the Dutch crew. Soon the sound of metal striking wood grew to a cacophony as they threw their weapons to the deck. The Englishmen stopped behind him, aware René needed no assistance. When the last Dutchman had dropped his weapon, the English crew roared their approval. They made certain of the disarmed sailors, pushing them into a seated mass in one corner of the deck. René remained on the Dutch ship, awaiting the English cap-tain’s disposition. The captain descended to the deck. He was wounded, and one of his crew worked to bandage his arm as he walked. “Enough. I will not die of this. Leave off.” He walked over to stand before René who then lowered both of his swords to the deck. “You knew what was planned for you, sir, and yet you saved my life and fought for my ship. Why?” “I took you to be an honorable man, and I had no opportunity to make a judgment of the Dutchman’s captain.” René met the man’s eye. “Do you think I made the correct choice?” The captain smiled. The crew relaxed. A smile on the captain’s face was unusual. Even injured, the man stood ramrod straight. That suggested a fighting background, and indeed he was dressed formally, in an old style British naval uniform with the epaulets of a captain of the lists. Probably, he had always worn that uniform. Intelligent eyes that missed nothing studied René. “You are an unusual young man. I am sorry, but I never learned your name. Would you honor me with it now?” “I am René Gilbert, monsieur. I have trained for a position at sea—just not the one I was given aboard your ship.” “Edward Gordon, Captain of the Albion, at your service, sir.” The captain clicked his heels and made a slight bow. “It is clear to me, as to all of us, that you have indeed been trained—something to do with a sword, perhaps?” “I have had some training with a sword.” René smiled. “I have never heard the word ‘some’ used more inadequately.” Laughter rang across the deck. “I expect you’re hungry. Let us have dinner and talk about your future.” Turning to his men, he said, “Secure this ship and lock her crew within their hold. An extra tot of rum for all hands.” He then turned to the man who’d been trying to bandage him. “See that every man receives care, ours first, and then theirs. Come René, we’re done here.” The captain pulled himself up a rope ladder thrown from the Albion. René followed him. Once aboard, the captain repeated orders to secure the ship and headed for his cabin. “James, tell Cook I have a guest for dinner and to allow the men an extra ration of rum tonight.” René made his way over to James and offered his hand. “You have saved my life, sir. I will find a way to repay you when I am able.” James returned the handshake. “Can’t say why I did what I did, but I am glad things worked out. I will make certain the doctor gets a look at you when you’re finished with the captain. Somehow, I do not think you will be using the hold as quarters again.” And that is a good thing. Captain Gordon held the door for René and motioned him to a seat at a heavy oak table. Taking a bottle of brandy from the armoire, he poured two glasses and handed one to René. He then took the chair at the head of the table. “It appears we have a few things to talk about,” Gordon said, with a sardonic half smile. “Captain, I mean no disrespect, but you are still bleeding. Would it not be better to wait until you have that shoulder attended?” “Shortly you will meet my good friend Albert Hopkins, our physician. He has kept me on this earth even when I may have chosen to leave it. I cannot imagine it’ll be long now. You see—” The door banged open, and a corpulent red-faced man carrying a well-worn leather satchel barged in. Struggling to catch his breath he wheezed, “Edward, you idiot.” Seeing that the man had company, his demeanor changed to one approximating proper respect. He cleared his throat while gasping for air. “Excuse me, but you are wounded. Would this be a good time to take care of that?” He paused and then added, “Sir.” “Albert, I would like you to meet a remarkable young man. I have the honor to present to you Monsieur René Gilbert. René, the honorable doctor Albert Hopkins, surgeon late of His Majesty’s Navy.” René stood and offered his hand to the doctor. “I am pleased to meet you, sir. And while I look forward to trading pleasantries with you at a later time, I think we would both be happier if you attended the captain’s wound.” “Nice to meet you, son, and I like the way you think already.” The doctor moved to Gordon’s side. He pulled off the remnants of the captain’s shirt and inspected the wound. “Not deep. Didn’t catch any tendons. All right, let’s clean it out and sew it.” The doctor took the bottle of brandy from the captain and poured some of it into the wound, sluicing it out. The captain’s face paled a little, but that was his only reaction. René had always had a keen interest in medicine and watched Doctor Hopkins closely. Although a man given to food and drink, the doctor’s hands belied his size. His movements were sure and swift. Using silk thread, he quickly closed the wound with small, neat stitches. With only alcohol to deaden the pain, a surgeon’s speed was a definite asset as long as skill accompanied it. René was pleased to see that in this case it did. René waited until the doctor tied the run of stitches. “I had the opportunity to watch dissections at the medical school in Padua. My fencing master felt I should be thoroughly familiar with both the inside and the outside of the body.” “Would you be interested in apprenticing with me?” Hopkins asked. “Merci, doctor. Under any other circumstances, I would leap at the opportunity. Unfortunately, I do not think I am destined to save lives. Most of my training has been in the other direction. I appreciate the honor of your offer, sir, but I must decline.” “There,” the doctor said as he finished. He then took out a clean strip of linen and bound the captain’s arm with it. “I will return to check on that, Edward. “Now you, son. Off with what’s left of that shirt.” René’s lips tightened as he struggled to remove his shirt. Both Hopkins and Gordon had to help before it came loose. “Here, sit on this keg. James did a good job with you, but a bit of brandy and a couple of stitches will not hurt.” As the brandy poured over René’s wounds, he stiffened and remained silent. The captain met the doctor’s glance and shook his head. “Have you sewn up here in two shakes,” the doctor muttered as he stitched René’s back. “There. Now I want some of that brandy to drink.” “Thomas,” the captain yelled at the door. The door opened, and an elderly man appeared in the doorway. “Yes, Captain?” “Tell Cook we will be three for dinner.” “Not for me,” said Hopkins. “A brandy, however, will hold me in good stead. I still have work to do before I eat.” “Just the two of us then,” said Captain Gordon. “And have Cook find something celebratory, the best he can. You might tell him time is of the essence.” “Right away, sir.” Thomas backed out and then closed the door. The captain poured the doctor a brandy and handed it to him. “This young man saved our ship, and there is no denying it. I have never seen a sword handled with such speed and precision. Never. It was like the men facing him weren’t even armed.” “I, ah…” René coughed. “Don’t even bother to say anything,” Gordon said. “Too many saw you for you to pretend it didn’t happen.” “I was trained with a sword from the age of five by a master swordsman.” René sipped his brandy.
 There was a pause as if the captain was weighing his words. The ship rocked gently. “I cannot deny my task was murder. The money from this commission released this ship from debt and freed me, and others, from certain ruin. I was once a moral man, but things happened that changed my life. I do not apologize for my deeds, but instead hope to make amends to you with my actions from this moment on. What would you have from me? You have given me my life and the lives of my men. If it be within my power to grant, you may rest assured you will have it.” “I must return to Bordeaux to protect my father and…others. I have only the clothes on my back. Have you searched the Dutch ship for plunder?” “We haven’t found her lock box yet, but we will. There’s gold aboard that ship.” “What will you do with her once she is off-loaded?” The captain paused. “I had planned to sink her after taking what we need. Now that I have cargo to trade, I cannot spare enough men to take her back as a prize. “Would you consider taking off everything of value except basic supplies, guns, and powder, and giving me the ship? Gordon shook his head. “It would be suicide to go over there alone. Even if I left you with enough Dutch crew to man the ship, I couldn’t give you any men to stand at your back. It matters not how good a swordsman you are. You cannot take on the whole crew by yourself.” “You are correct, I need to sleep. But I only need one man. Given the circumstances, I think I can convince the Dutchmen to act in their own interest. If I can show you it is possible, will you consider it?” René asked. “Let me think on it. We will talk again, after you look over their ship and sound out the men.” A knock sounded on the door. “Come in, Thomas.” “Enjoy your dinner, Captain,” said Doctor Hopkins, heading for the door. “Albert, get me the casualty figures when you’re able.” “Yes, sir.” the doctor said as he left. CHAPTER NINETEEN RENÉ CLIMBED up to the forecastle. “Good morning, Captain.” “Ah, Monsieur Gilbert. Allow me to present Lieutenant Abbott. Lieutenant Richard Abbott, Monsieur René Gilbert,” said the captain. Impeccably attired in navy wool and gold braid, the lieutenant was a tall stick-figure of a man with intelligent eyes and a large nose. “Pleased to meet you, Lieutenant.” René shook the offered hand. “You run a tight ship.” “We’ve a good, tough crew, but outmanned and surprised… well, the men wanted you to know you’ve got a lot of free drinks coming when we hit port.” “My motivation was to remain alive. Even now, as I think of my decision on who to fight, I cannot give you a clear reason for my choice. Perhaps it was the fact my English is better than my Dutch.” Both men laughed. “A more probable reason is the care I received from Monsieur Bailey. I have to admit, I am glad of the decision I made.” “So are we all,” said the captain. “It still leaves us, however, with a bit of a problem. We can probably disguise you or let you off somewhere before we dock, but keeping a ship’s worth of men quiet is simply not possible.” “Have you given more thought to my request?” asked René. “I had planned to take everything off the Vrijheid and scuttle her,” replied Gordon, who turned to René and smiled his half smile. “Tell me what you’re thinking, son.” “How many men would I need to sail the Vrijheid?” René asked. “Well, ideally a brigantine would take a minimum of twenty-five, but I believe you could make do with eighteen.” Captain Gordon pulled out his pipe and paced the forecastle. “With that few, you had better hope no trouble crosses your bow. Here’s the way I see it. “One, the crew needs to think you’ve died for us to get paid and you to get Gaspard off your back, even for a short time. “Two, we need to make certain that thought does not become fact. “Three, you’ve got to sleep. “And four, I cannot spare you any trained men. I could send over a couple of troublemakers, but they’d be more harm than help. We need to address these points, or we’re spittin’ into the wind,” said the captain. “I need one man. One man I can trust. Will you give me James Bailey? I will not have you order anyone to go with me, but if he is willing to go, will you transfer him?” asked René. “Aye, if he is willing.” “We have dealt with numbers three and four. For number two, no one can guarantee that, and I accept it as my responsibility, not yours. That leaves us with number one, a way for me to appear to die without actually doing it.” René looked out at the ocean’s endless horizon. Of the many faces the sea presented, early morning was one of his favorites. Bright and filled with possibilities. “Can you stay here another day and let me spend the night aboard the Vrijheid? I need to talk with the men left aboard her. Then you can start by taking off the men you will need, leaving me the eighteen I choose. With James and myself, that makes twenty, and we can run with that. Will you leave us armed? Even though I do not plan to get into any scrapes until the crew has come together, ’twould be suicide for me to take out an unarmed ship. To put men at risk in a ship unable to defend itself would be the height of folly.” The captain turned to Lieutenant Abbott. “Have we taken off their powder and shot?” “No, sir. As we have enough of our own powder and shot, we thought it prudent to get their cargo first,” Abbott replied. “So, it is possible.” “What if you cannot control the men and they turn those guns on the Albion?” asked Gordon. “I can control the men.” René’s words came out ice-cold. From their expressions, neither man had the slightest doubt as to the truth of that statement. “The reality is—and I mean no offense, sir—when you cut the Vrijheid loose, there is no way the Albion could catch her with the wind or against it. If you will share your trading schedule with me, I will make certain we do not make the same ports.” “No offense taken, for I cannot argue with truth,” said the captain. “I am in agreement if James chooses to accompany you. If not, we will have to think of something else. Without someone to watch your back, not even you will survive that ship. By the way, James is murder with a musket or a sword. He is the only man jack aboard who would gainsay the boatswain.” Lieutenant Abbott reached out to shake René’s hand. “To the Vrijheid and her new captain.” “Give you joy, sir,” said Captain Gordon. “Merci, Captain.” René went topside to seek out James and found him up in the crow’s nest overseeing repairs to the topgallants. A steady breeze rocked the ship on the swells. He scampered up the rigging to the cheers of the men on deck, and in short order, joined James. “You there, tie it down right. We get a blow and it comes loose, ’tis you I’ll be sendin’ up here to retie it,” yelled James at one of the men on the arm. He turned to René. “I had not expected to see you up here. Feeling dizzy?” “I have spent many a long hour on the yard. A boring post most of the time unless you get weather. Then ’tis all the excitement a man ever wanted, and more.” “’Twill be that,” James agreed. “Now that you’re here, what can I do for you? I’m thinkin’ you’re not here to enjoy the sight.” “I need to get off this ship. Preferably alive. The captain has offered me the Dutch ship, along with eighteen of her crew. She will keep her powder, shot, muskets, and supplies aboard. I have experience as a navigator and can sail us where we choose. I have demonstrated my sword skills. What I require is a man I can trust to help me run the ship. I need a lieutenant.” “What are your intentions? Will you keep her a privateer?” “Non. We do not need to steal to make a good living. I come from a trading family and know my way around alcohol and weapons. I have worked as quartermaster and have the knowledge and skill to make us money.” “Do you intend to sell slaves?” “I do not, and I might take back what I said about privateering if I encounter a slave ship. I will not abide traffic in human misery or those who pursue it. I know what kind of ship this is, but my judgment of the captain is that he would not have chosen this vessel if his survival had not depended on it. Am I being naïve?” René asked as he surveyed the repairs to the yard. “No, you’ve the right of it. Five years ago, one of the sailors we took on had the sickness. When we come into port, they took the captain’s ship out into the harbor and burned her and everything the captain had with her. We had some hard times after that. Worked on other ships until the captain could buy the Albion. Best we could do. We could barely refit to make her seaworthy. She has never carried a slave under this captain, and no matter what, I don’t think she ever would. Now the Albion’s got a real cargo, ’twill not even be a thought. Soon as she makes port, he will rip out that hold.” James reached for the mast as a heavy swell canted the ship. “He didn’t know why you had killed the boy. Still, he knew it had been a fairly fought duel. He’s a good man, the captain, and he will be payin’ for what he almost did for a while yet. Hey, turn it ‘round!” he yelled at one of the men in the sheets. “As to your proposition…what share do I get? That is, if I decide to join you on this fool’s venture.” “Half of what I get, you get. So if I get nothing, you get half.” René smiled. “Smart-mouth boy. I expect I will have to be callin’ you captain or some such?” James smiled back. “I think that would be wise in front of the men. Ship’s discipline and all.” “I am your man. Everyone dies; might as well have some fun beforehand. Now, you talk a lot. Let me see if you can do what you say. Get out there on the yardarm and help tie down those sails. Since I expect this will be the last time I give you an order, I may as well enjoy it.” René was already barefoot, so he jumped onto the yardarm and walked out to where the men labored All work ceased as every eye watched him. Eighty
 feet above the deck, he walked the yard as if strolling along a country lane on a windless summer’s day. When he reached the sailors working on the rigging, he said, “Mister Bailey seems to think I might be of assistance. Tell me what you need me to do.” After he spoke with the men aboard the Vrijheid, René was confident about seventeen. The eighteenth was the cook, and René had never met a surlier individual. A short man with long greasy hair and bad teeth, he responded to René’s questions with bare civility. René had encountered grumpy, dissatisfied people before, but it was unfortunate the cook had a skill they needed. When questioned about their work, the men were forthcoming, but when René mentioned their previous captain, they refused to meet his eye. The problem nagged at him. He and James separated the Vrijheid’s crew into two groups, one to go to the Albion and the other to remain aboard the Vrijheid. Next came the ship’s inspection. As they approached the mainmast, René stopped in disgust. The mainmast was where corporal punishment took place. For larger offenses, flogging was typical, although more often with a single whip than the cat. The mast of this ship was stained solid red, from the edge of the deck right up to the height of a man. Undoubtedly, every man among this crew wore stripes on his back. The stain was ugly, and it would be the first thing cleaned when he took command. “’Tis a good thing their captain is already dead,” said René, his jaw hardening. “Aye, ’tis, for he wouldn’t last long as crew,” said James, his expression an echo of René’s. “Leave the mast to me. We will finish unloading cargo sometime tomorrow afternoon. Since we never fired a shot at this ship, she is ready to sail. The remaining Dutch crew will be transferred before nightfall. Will you return to the Albion tonight?” “Non. I will stay aboard the Vrijheid and get the feel of her. Captain Gordon copied what he needed from the Vrijheid’s log and gave me the original. I have work to do and only this night to get it done. Gather your gear together with anything else you think we will need and bring it over early morning. My plan is to leave at dawn the following day.” René clapped James on the shoulder. “And get some sleep. It may soon become a rare commodity.” “Aye, aye, Captain,” James said, this time without the sarcastic overtones. “I will see you at sunrise tomorrow.” Enough for one day. René closed the Vrijheid’s log. He rose and went out into the passageway. There were two other small cabins below deck and a hatchway down into the cargo holds, one of which held the eighteen men he hoped would see the advantages of sailing under him. He climbed down the ladder onto the deck and walked, surveying his new ship. With the exception of cleaning the mainmast, the ship was in reasonable repair. It was an older vessel, but René was certain she would move well. He completed his tour around the deck and headed back toward his cabin. He stopped, stretching out his senses. Something was off. “You have a sense that is the combination of the other five, plus some indefinable awareness that has yet to be adequately understood,” said the Maestro as he feinted and drove a thrust toward René’s head. Parrying the thrust, René tried to tip-cut the Maestro’s wrist, only to have his sword blocked and pressed down. “How do you develop this sense if you cannot define or understand it?” asked René, parrying a thrust to the outside by circling the Maestro’s blade and pushing it away from his body. “Belief is the key. Faith is the door. Persistence will at last open it. I have not surprised you in a while. Do you think you can react quicker than I can act?” The Maestro thrust below René’s left hand. René swept his blade down and to the left, parrying the thrust. He followed through with a backhand cut to the Maestro’s face that was easily blocked. “Non, I expect I am not that fast. Then how can I parry a thrust from you?” “By using that sixth sense. We all have it; very few develop it. You have learned to watch the eyes of your opponent for the physical signal that an action is imminent. I have also taught you to hear the thought as it forms, even before your opponent’s body recognizes it. The ancients believed in thought transference. One of the meanings of the ancient Egyptian ‘Eye of Horus’ signifies the ability to read other’s thoughts. You will find that some experiences beggar explanation. You are at the beginning of a road that will go far beyond your current beliefs. Trust the evidence your reality brings you.” Before the end of his statement, the Maestro had pulled a small dagger from behind him and stabbed René in the arm while forcing René’s blade up and to the left with his rapier. With blood seeping down his right arm, René stepped back and sucked in a deep breath. He transferred the sword to his left hand, and stepped forward again. “En garde.” René returned to his cabin, his sense of threat remained, unsatisfied. He would do what he could to prepare. Bordeaux and Clarisse waited and nothing in the universe would prevent his return. CHAPTER TWENTY CAPTAIN GORDON descended to the deck of the Vrijheid, followed by Lieutenant Abbott. “May I have a word with you, sir?” he called to René. “Oui, Captain.” René checked the last water barrel and then presented himself. “Is there somewhere we may talk in private?” “Of course. The captain’s cabin. Follow me.” Located aft, mid-deck, Gordon inspected the Dutch captain’s previous quarters. “He lived a damn sight fancier than I do. Still, being alive has its recommendations.” Gordon tugged a heavy chair from the table and sat. “I don’t suppose you have anything to drink?” “Only a small amount of brandy that should best be kept for medicinal purposes.” “Oh, that will not do, will not do at all. Richard, have a couple of your men smuggle some kegs of rum back onto this ship. There are times when ’tis more valuable than gold.” Gordon smiled. Abbott nodded and left the cabin. “There’s a storm coming,” said Gordon. “Oui, I sensed it, too.” “Will you be able to manage in a storm? You have to convince eighteen men to follow you. Oh, they’ll get her out well enough, but after you’re out of our guns’ range—which we shall conveniently misjudge when we fire on you—will they follow you or toss you overboard?” “They will not toss me overboard easily, but I am not invincible. I have given it some thought. This turn in the weather may even be fortuitous. If they want to survive, the storm will demand they work together under my direction. The sea, as you well know, is not forgiving. ’Tis a good plan, but I am open to a refinement if you have one.” “As to the loyalty or threat from your crew, that will be something you will have to figure out. As for keeping Gaspard’s contract, we need to convince the Albion’s crew of your death. We will smuggle over one of the Vrijheid’s men who died yesterday. I have had Hopkins keep it quiet. The dead man is about your size. When you cut loose, have the men make a ruckus as if they’re in a fight for their lives. Then have them toss the body overboard far enough away so that making an exact identification will be difficult, especially in a storm. Here, take this.” The captain put a paper-wrapped package in René’s hands. “What is it?” “’Tis a red shirt like the one the dead man will be wearing. We will bring him aboard in a barrel of rum. Make certain you pick the right barrel. Shame to waste good rum.” Gordon laughed. “No ruse lasts forever, but if we succeed, ’twill at least give you some time before Gaspard becomes aware you live. He is not a man to accept failure lightly. Well, I need to get back to the Albion. I expect this will be the last I see of you for a while.” Gordon stood and extended his hand. “It has been a privilege knowing you, Monsieur Gilbert. I hope you manage to straighten out your affairs.” René clasped the captain’s hand. “It has been an honor to know you, sir. Good fortune, Captain.” “And to you, son, as well.” Captain Gordon climbed back aboard the Albion. Lieutenant Abbott shouted orders to the ship above, and the Albion’s men lowered a half dozen barrels to the deck of the Vrijheid. “Secure that one to the aft rail and stow the rest in the hold,” the lieutenant called out to the men. He walked over and shook René’s hand. “Well, sir, I wish you the best.” “Thank you, lieutenant.” “Here is a present from the captain. He expected you might find a use for it.” Abbott handed over a carved wooden box. Inside was a small sword, longer than a cutlass but shorter than a rapier, with a silver hilt inlaid with precious stones. This was not a dandy’s weapon; the blade was fine Spanish steel and had been used and cared for. There was a tooled leather sheath to go with it. René was speechless. An heirloom such as this was priceless. “S’il vous plaît, tell Captain Gordon I will take care of his sword, and I will not dishonor it. It will be my pleasure to return it to him when next we meet.” “I’ll be off then. Good luck.” The lieutenant grabbed the ropes and pulled himself up to board the Albion. The sky grew darker and more threatening by the minute. Then, as if the storm had taken a deep breath, the wind died. There was absolute calm, like the moment after a wave had returned to the sea in preparation for its next assault. It was time. In the confusion of separating the two ships, René hurried below decks. The next time the crew of the Albion saw him, he would be wearing a red shirt, and the ships would already be separated. The deck of the Vrijheid appeared deserted. James waited with the crew below, ready to charge on deck and take control of the ship as soon as the Albion released her lines. René’s discussion earlier that morning with the crew of the Vrijheid flitted through his mind as he waited for the jolt that would signal his ship’s release from the Albion.
 He had entered the hold by himself, and after a short spirited discussion, James had obeyed his order to lock the door behind him. There would be no turning back from this point. Now was the time to establish himself as the Vrijheid’s new captain. He was armed, his sword held casually at rest by his side. The lock made a loud click as James turned the key. René stood before them. Stunned, the men’s expressions betrayed their disbelief that one man, one enemy, would come before eighteen men alone. René waited. The expressions changed as bewilderment became anger. A few of the crew started toward René. “Anyone who comes within four feet of me will die. I have no time to explain or justify my actions aboard the Albion. I have killed a number of your shipmates. I regret that more than you know, but I intend to take over this ship. You have seen my skill with a sword. I will captain this ship, with you or without you. Are there any among you so foolish that you dare attack me now, unarmed? I hope not. On my honor, I will give each of you the opportunity to exact revenge with the weapon of your choice, once we are free of the Albion.” Not one man ventured another step. They looked at each other and then to a man, took a step back. Self-preservation had won the moment and the Dutchmen stood silent, focused on René. These were good men. They were not his men yet, but they could be reasoned with. René had chosen each one based on his sense of the man as well as his skills. “I am a trained navigator, and I come from a family of traders. You do not have to accept my assertions, as I will prove them to you if you see fit to stay with this ship. A storm is coming, and the Albion will cut us loose. They may try to scuttle us, but we have a better than even chance to escape. Once loose, there is no way that ship can catch us. “We are only twenty men, and that is a skeleton crew for a balmy day, let alone a storm. I have chosen each of you for a reason, and together, we can do better than just survive. If we defeat the storm, we will decide what is to become of this ship. I must warn you, I will not surrender this ship to you. Whilst I cannot take on eighteen of you, at least ten will die. You may not believe that statement, but ’tis important you know the truth as I see it.” René paused for effect and then asked, “Who will sail with me until we have cleared the storm? If you will, take a step forward.” The cook stepped forward followed by the rest of the men. “Bon. If one of us prospers, we all will. James!” René called. “I am certain you will understand, however, if I do not unlock the door until we are free of the Albion. There is trust, and there is stupidity. If we survive, we will have the time to gain the one and reduce the other.” René rapped his sword hilt twice against the hold door. Again the click of the key and James held the door open. James locked the hold behind him and turned. “What do you think?” “I think we have a crew. Most of these men were impressed from English or French sails. My hope is that there is no love lost for the Dutch ship that took them. “Now we wait. A good swell is building and that alone will carry us away from the Albion,” René said. “Return to the unloading. The storm will be on us before they can off-load everything, so drag your heels on the cases of muskets and the ax heads if you can. Every trade item they fail to remove is to our advantage.” As the wind rose, the sheets hummed and then shrieked. The men of the Albion rushed to cast off the lines connecting the two ships before the storm’s fury turned them both into tinder. The smaller Vrijheid struggled like a fish on a line, its hull banging against the Albion. James unlocked the hold, and the men poured out. René stopped them. “When we are fifty yards off, I will show myself on deck and yell to the Albion as if I have been left behind. ’Tis then I want every man jack of you to cheer and shout the devil at the Albion’s crew. Convince them you have killed me while I retire below deck. ’Tis important the crew of the Albion thinks I am dead. Otherwise, they might decide to come looking for us. We brought over the body of one of your men who died in the fight. He will be thrown overboard to simulate my death.” Someone muttered, “No respect for the dead.” “I apologize for the indignity of tossing him, but I promise we will say a service for him once we are away. If we cannot convince them I am dead, you are all as good as.” The Albion released her last line. Without canvas, the Vrijheid slipped off the Albion’s stern as the larger ship caught the wind. “All right, here we go.” The Dutchmen poured out of the hatchway and raced up the masts to raise enough sail to gain steerage. The ship fell away from the Albion faster and faster. Thunderous black clouds and driving rain blocked the sun. The noise of the rain battering the ship’s deck almost drowned out the sound of the cannon as a shot burned through the air overhead. Although a part of the ruse, it was closer than René would have liked for the Vrijheid had moved away from the Albion faster than expected. René came up on deck wearing the red shirt and stood within a clump of men who waved their hands and yelled. He called out to the Albion and made certain they saw him before he slipped back out of sight. Hidden behind barrels lashed to the deck, James pushed a red shirted body over the side. The Vrijheid’s crew worked the storm. He had chosen well. Whether they accepted his leadership was another thing. Time would sort it out. Their ship was far enough away from the Albion for René to return to the deck. On the small chance the storm brought the two ships within sight of each other, he had changed shirts. Once above, he fought the wind across the heaving deck going from hand hold to hand hold until he reached the main mast. He cupped his hands around his mouth and shouted to the men in the rigging. “She can hold a little more top sail. Shake out the gallants.” The Vrijheid responded smartly to the additional sail. Pleased, René relieved James on the whipstaff and settled into guiding his ship through the storm. James and he had double-locked the arms locker and holds with new locks from the Albion, so there would be no weapons available to the crew. He had also put a new lock on the captain’s quarters, and it had the sturdiest door on the ship. The storm blew steady through a long afternoon and night. René stayed at the helm guiding his ship. He had James set up watches for the men resting them as possible throughout the night, making sure they were well fed. Early the next morning, the storm blew itself out. Daylight increased as the rain slackened. The wind stayed high, as if wanting one more chance at the Vrijheid. James brought René a cup of hot tea. “Here, let me take the staff while you drink this. I wasn’t certain there for a while, but it appears we’ve weathered this storm all right. There will soon be another one brewing, and ’twill not be from wind and wave. Are you ready?” “As ready as I will ever be. ’Twould be nice if the wind died down a bit, however, if only to save me from yelling. Hard enough to communicate as it is. My Dutch is unused at best.” René kept an eye on the topsails for a sign the wind was ready to ease off. “James, if the weather holds true, we will have a period of calm after the storm. One extra sword will make no difference. I want you to stay here, hold her on a west by southwest course. Make certain we avoid meeting the Albion.” The wind died as if someone had emptied the last gusts from Aeolus’ bag. “Well that’s it then. Wish me luck.” René put down his tea, loosened his sword in its sheath, and strode toward the center of the deck, where the men were already congregating. “Good luck,” said James. The men of the Vrijheid formed themselves into small groups, except for the cook, who stood by himself. On most ships, men took pains to be friends with the cook, no matter how grumpy he was, if only to get that little extra sometimes. That was not the case here. René allowed himself to settle into that quiet calm center where all would come together as it must. “For now, my name is unimportant. What is important is I have taken command of this ship. I chose each of you for your skills. This ship will never again be a slave ship for either cargo or impressed seamen. Those of you who no longer wish to remain with this ship may leave at the first port we reach. Believe me, we will need every one of you to reach that port. I will not give up my ship voluntarily, so you will have to kill me to take it. Now will be the only time I will entertain your grievances. I can only guess how your previous captain ran his ship, but from the look of the main mast, ’twas with a heavy hand.” The men glanced over at the cook, confirming a thought that had been building in René’s mind. “James Bailey will be lieutenant and quartermaster. In the future you will speak to him, and he will relay your concerns to me.” The men shuffled their feet, uncomfortable with something, yet they remained silent. “Is there a man among you who would challenge me for command?” René called out, his hand on the hilt of his sword. More shuffling and then the cook walked over and pushed a huge man to the front. “What’s your name?” René asked the man. “John Abel,” The man stood well over six feet tall, every inch muscled and lean. “Do you wish to challenge me, John?” “I suppose so.” René paced back and forth, occasionally turning his back on the men. “I have never heard a more indecisive challenge in my life. What kind of captain could you have had? I expect he died hiding in a barrel somewhere. What kind of a coward trains a crew who think they might perhaps possibly want to challenge me?” The crew moved back from the cook. “On top of that, one look at the mast tells me this so called captain was a small,
 vindictive man more interested in seeing others hurt, always holding back in a fight. A coward, for certain. Hard to follow a man like that, one who always wants someone else to do his fighting for him. He must have been one of those small, frightened men who stab you in the back.” René purposely turned his back on the cook offering him an easy target. If his suspicion was correct… The cook lunged toward René, a dagger aimed at the center of his back. But René’s preternatural awareness of the space around him had given warning of the attack, and the man lunged through empty space. With Gordon’s sword at the ready, René faced the cook, whom he now knew to be the Vrijheid’s captain. “Just as I thought, your captain is a stab-you-in-the-back coward. One who will hide and pretend to be someone else to escape the responsibility of his actions.” “Don’t stand there, get him,” the Dutch captain had dropped his charade and screamed at the men. “He is only one man. He cannot kill all of you.” None of the men moved. René took a step toward the man. “I don’t want to kill any of you— except perhaps you, coward.” “You’re holding a sword,” whined the Vrijheid’s captain. “Not a fair challenge against a dagger. You will kill me.” “Oh, I intend to kill you, but you’re right, it needs to be a fair challenge.” René tossed his sword to John Abel. “John, hold that for me until I finish cleansing the ship of this piece of garbage.” The Vrijheid captain’s mouth twisted into an evil grin. “You’ve got a sword now, man. Kill him!” John met René’s eyes and nodded. “Well, if you’re not going to fight, at least give me the sword,” pleaded the Dutch captain. John shook his head. René pulled a dagger from his belt and smiled. “Will you come over here, or do I have to chase you all over the ship, coward?” “I will show you who’s a coward.” The cook held up his dagger and inched toward René. “Do you see this blade, boy? See the groove along its edge? ’Tis filled with poison. One touch and you’re dead.” “I guess I will just have to avoid being touched.” René said as he turned. Again the captain’s blade struck nothing but air. Furious, the man charged again, but this time their blades crashed together. The Dutch captain was well versed in the art of the knife, no matter that he preferred to attack from the rear. Thrust, parry, and then there was a line of blood running down his face from ear to jaw. He jumped back and looked around wildly, but there was nowhere to go. He charged René again. This time, when he withdrew, his left arm hung useless, its tendon sliced. “I would prolong this, but we have a ship to run.” René turned and blocked a thrust, and as the Dutchman went past him, he slid his blade through the man’s throat. The Vrijheid’s captain fell to the deck and convulsed as he bled out. There was silence aboard the Vrijheid. No one moved. “S’il vous plait, John, may I have my weapon back?” “Yes, sir.” John handed René his sword hilt first. René replaced the sword in its scabbard, and mentally thanked Captain Gordon for the weapon, relieved he had not been forced to use it. “Would you take a detail and dispose of that,” René said, looking at the dead man on the deck. “Be careful of the blade. John, what was your rank?” “I was the boatswain, sir.” John answered. “I would be pleased if you continued to fill that rank and those duties, sir,” said René. “Aye, aye, Captain.” The big man cast a proud grin at his new captain. “Vrijheid has been the name of a privateer and sometimes pirate vessel. I am changing the purpose of this ship and so will change the name. We will hold a proper de-naming ceremony after which this ship will be known as the Seahawk. There is one more task I want done immediately. Clean that mast and deck. I want to see the shine of wood, and only wood.” The men cheered. “Do not mistake me. If you deserve flogging, you will feel the whip, but my intent is for the discipline to serve us and not the other way round. We will run this ship well, and we will get rich doing it. As of now, we are the LeClarisse Trading Company, and we will act honorably behind that name. Is that understood?” René said meeting the eyes of his crew. “Aye, Captain.” was the mixed response. These men had heard promises before, but René was confident they would give him a chance to prove his words. “John, detail someone to relieve James at the whipstaff, as he and I will need to eat and then sleep. There is only a small chance of us running up on the Albion, but to make sure, we will change course to east by southeast. Oh, and we will need a cook. Is there any chance one of you has some experience? It would be a damn shame for us all to die of malnutrition after having survived this long.” The men turned to look at a small man who stood in the back. They pushed him forward. “And you are?” asked René. “I am Calvin Downs, sir,” he answered, doing his best to control the tremor in his voice. “Tell me you know something about cooking?” “Well, sir, I am the cook. The captain made me say I was gun crew. “The saints are smiling on us now. At least, I hope they are.” René stole a look at the crew. The men were grinning. René nodded. ’Twas a good sign when a crew cast their favor upon a cook, a very good sign. James approached. “Have you a port in mind, Captain?” “Once we are certain to avoid the Albion, make for the Port of Bordeaux. I have unfinished business there.” CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE THE SUN was in his eyes, and René blinked to clear his vision. He had fallen asleep in the captain’s cabin aboard the Vrijheid—the Seahawk—after the storm, but he was no longer aboard ship. Instead, he appeared to be back at Château Gilbert, in the courtyard, waiting for his fencing master to appear and begin the day’s practice. This is a realistic dream. But is it a dream? Everything is so real. He walked to the training table and chose his favorite, the rapier. “En garde,” said the Maestro from behind him. Knowing better than to speak or question the Maestro, even within a dream, René turned to meet the first strike speeding toward him. He raised his rapier in time, blocked a high strike and then disengaged. Taking a deep breath, he deepened his focus and balance as he centered himself. The Maestro would explain in his own time. René’s responsibility was to remain uninjured long enough to hear the explanation. He settled into that cold, calm state of focus and faced the master. A feint, a thrust, as the Maestro’s sword danced with incredible speed and precision. Disengage, block, and riposte. René bided his time for an opening. Somehow, this sparring match felt different. René was stronger and older, but more than that had changed. He had gained a quality of awareness that only the specter of death could provide. The Maestro advanced. His sword, a singing blur, touched René’s left shoulder. René winced. That answered the question as to whether I would feel pain or not. René ignored the pain and turned into the next strike, blocking the Maestro’s blade by forcing it down and to the left. As he moved forward, he continued the turn, stepped into the Maestro and transferred all the power of the turn from his legs through his torso and into the point of his elbow, striking the Maestro below his left ear. The man collapsed into the dirt like a wooden marionette whose strings had been cut. René secured the Maestro’s sword with his boot and then took it from his hand. Never leave an opponent armed. Do not assume incapacitation. Even within a dream, as he faced his fencing master, the lessons the Maestro had drummed into him every day except Sunday came back to him. The thought made him smile. The wise choice was to allow the Maestro to awaken on his own. René sat at the table and poured himself a cup of tea. He examined his arm. Although it was bleeding, the wound was only a scratch. The Maestro twitched and then sat up. René waited for the meaning of this experience to come to him. The man had a huge smile on his face as he stood and came over to the table. René pushed off his chair. “Do not stand for me. Our relationship has changed.” Maestro rubbed his jaw, moved it gingerly. “That was an excellent strike. I could not have done better. May I sit?” “Of course. Would you like tea?” “Oui.” René poured and waited patiently. Taught to be intensely aware of his surroundings, he noticed that the shadows on the courtyard wall had not changed position. “This will perhaps go quicker if you ask,” said the Maestro. “Why am I here?” “René, you are a member of an ancient brotherhood. We have all agreed to return lifetime after lifetime, to protect our younger siblings until we are no longer needed.” “Then this brotherhood has chosen poorly, for I have killed many more than I have protected.” René stood abruptly and walked over to the pile of bricks lifting one from the pile. Holding the brick he faced the Maestro. “I am death incarnate. I have protected no one, least of all those I love.” “We rarely know how well we are doing in any lifetime. I assure you that you have indeed saved hundreds and hundreds more unborn. Each act, like a pebble tossed into a pond, reverberates, each created wavelet adding to or canceling out others. Even the smallest act has effects much larger than recognized at its inception. Do you trust me?” René studied the brick in his hand and then tossed it back on the pile. “My intuition confirms your identity, but this place is a construct. If this is but a dream, then you may represent a symbol I am unaware of.” “And if this is not a dream? Over the years, I have taught you to recognize the illusory nature of the world. There are an infinite number of realities played out at the same time, and this place is but one. I felt its familiarity would aid our exchange of information. I can easily change it if you wish.” “Non, I find a certain comfort in facing the unknown here,” said
 René with a wry smile. “I trust the Maestro, and even if you are only symbolic, I do not think I could create a deceptive symbol in your form. What would you have me do?” “What are your plans?” “To return to Bordeaux and kill François Gaspard.” “Revenge?” “Non. I have sampled revenge, and I like neither its taste nor its after-effects. The only way I can protect my father and Clarisse is to remove the threat he poses. Gaspard is high in the lists, with the king’s ear. No matter how much wealth I acquire, I will never be able to protect those I love as long as he remains.” Unable to stay seated, René rose and began to pace. “François Gaspard is not your enemy, René.” “If not Monsieur Gaspard, then who?” “You have an  ancient enemy, once counted your dearest friend. He will do his best in this lifetime to remove you from the stage, but as I have taught you, you must patiently gather your resources, choosing the ground and time of your conflict. Your final battle with him will occur in a place where the only limits are those you accept. Until you reclaim the skills and awareness you have earned over hundreds of lifetimes, you will have no chance of victory.” “Can you tell me his name?” “You will come to his name in due time. For now, know that your true enemy is not François Gaspard.” “What if I choose to ignore this dream and return to Bordeaux anyway?” “You will fail, and mankind’s misery will be prolonged for thousands of years. Time is a moving river, and one’s vision of it has certain limitations based on the available light and the shape of any particular stretch. Make port at Marseilles. Your best destiny will be found there.” The courtyard began to fade. “Wait, I must know of Clarisse’s safety,” called René. The Maestro was already becoming transparent. He smiled sadly. “She will not be harmed by the Gaspards. Destiny is never arbitrary. It is an agreement forged in love between the souls who create it.” Then the sun was again in René’s eyes, but coming from the portholes in his cabin, the captain’s cabin aboard the Seahawk. He sat up. The ship gently swayed, accompanied by the reassuring sounds of a vessel making headway. From the angle of the sun, he had slept for almost twenty-four hours straight. As he swung his legs over the side of the bunk, his heel banged into wood with a hollow sound. He inspected the bottom of the bed. It sat on a raised wooden foundation. There should have been drawers or moveable boards, but he found none. He walked to the end of the bed and inspected the baseboards. They were the same. Why build a bed without storage underneath? Space on an ocean-going ship was always at a premium. Often, trade goods filled the captain’s cabin. René pulled the down mattress off the bed. The bottom of the bed was wood, but it had an unusual pattern of slats and a space at one corner. René slid the board, creating a space at the other end. He then pulled the perpendicular board until it filled that space which created another space. He continued until a board in the middle of the bed popped up. He leaned over to pull up that piece of board and then stopped. An eerie sensation slithered along René’s spine. Something was not right. He studied the configuration of slats and the space left beside the loose board. Grabbing a large pewter candleholder, he wedged it into the space. Then he pulled up the remaining board to reveal a storage space beneath the bed. Bright sun beamed through the windows, illuminating the secret space. Within lay two padlocked oak chests. The larger was a rectangle two feet by one foot by one foot and the second, half the size of the first. There was also a flintlock pistol armed and aimed at the hole. The insertion of the candleholder had blocked the wire from increasing tension on its trigger mechanism. Carefully, René released the wire from the trigger and lifted the weapon from its frame. The padlocks were old and rusted and offered only momentary resistance. The larger one was filled with silver. In the smaller, the brilliant gleam of gold reflected the sun’s light. René sat back on the wooden slats and contemplated his luck. Without the storm, the Albion’s crew would have discovered the captain’s secret stash. Now, the Seahawk would get a first class refit with enough left to fill her hold. René rummaged through the clothing he found in the previous captain’s sea chest. He located a shirt that looked about his size and pulled off his own. He stopped. There on his left shoulder was a newly formed scab. It was a wound left by the touch of a rapier, the Maestro’s rapier. Do not challenge meaning, for it will either blossom in its own time or not, and as you cannot force a flower to grow, neither can understanding’s tempo be commanded. He placed his finger on the scab. The wound looked clean, but he would douse it with brandy and cover it. Wounds had a way of festering on a ship, and he would need to attend to those on his back. He hadn’t asked the crew if anyone had any medical experience. He would see to that as well. He glanced at the wound once more and then continued dressing. For now, he needed to read through the captain’s rutter. Every piece of information he could learn of the Seahawk and her history would be crucial if he was to captain her successfully. “Come in.” René set aside the logbook. No response. “Come in,” he called again, louder. The door remained closed. René slid his sword from its scabbard and stepped toward the door. Standing to the side, he yanked it open. There before him was a thin tow-headed boy of about eleven, attired in tattered oversized clothing. The lad did his best to remain in a posture of rigid attention, but he could barely stand. His undernourished frame shook so hard, his teeth chattered. “Your p…pardon, sir, but Mister Bailey said I was to be your steward, sir.” The boy appeared terrified. His gaze fixed on the sword in René’s hand then past his shoulder, then back to the sword, anywhere but René’s eyes. “Relax, I am not going to use this sword on you.” René paused. “Unless you deserve it.” The boy turned whiter. “That was a poor joke. What is your name?” “Sir…my name…” He stuttered. “You know, the one your mother gave you. People use it to get your attention.” “An-Andrew, sir,” the boy answered. “Andrew Merchant, sir.” “Ah, bon. You are English, oui?” “Yes, sir. I was aboard the Regency. But the Regency ain’t no more.” The boy grasped the sides of his legs as he struggled to get his trembling under control. “Mister Bailey said the first thing you’d be needing was something to eat, and I was to bring it soon as you were up and about.” Andrew kept a watchful eye on René’s sword. “Andrew, let me make one thing clear. You do not need to fear me unless you make a large mistake in your allegiance. I will expect your best no matter what you’re doing, but mistakes happen. As long as they do not happen through sloth or negligence, we will use them to learn from, you and I both. “How long have you been aboard this ship?” “Seven months now, sir.” “Turn around, Andrew. Let me see your back.” The boy turned and pulled up his shirt. His back was covered with countless lash-stripes. Angry welts ridged through them, some of them obviously of recent application. René’s expression changed from disgust to anger. Apparently no one aboard this ship lacked such scarring. “I am sorry you had to sail under so poor an excuse of a man as your previous captain. You will be expected to do your work, and you will be paid. It will be up to you whether you decide to sail with this ship or not when we reach port. Do you understand? If you decide to return home, we will arrange it. At the least, you will write and tell your parents you are safe and have found gainful employment.” Andrew’s eyes glazed in disbelief. His shoulders slumped lower with each promise. “Yes, sir.” René nodded, understanding the boy’s reaction. “Do you know why you were chosen for this crew?” “No, sir.” “A ship is not run by muscle alone. There are times when cleverness is called for. There are places where a fully-grown man cannot reach. I have done all the jobs you will be called upon to do, and I am none the worse for it.” René paused to think on the responsibility he now shouldered. “Well then, go and see if cook has something for me. Mister Bailey was correct, I am famished.” As Andrew turned to go, René said, “S’il vous plait, ask Mister Bailey to attend me at his convenience.” “Yes, sir, Captain,” said Andrew, racing up the gangway. For an instant, he was that young boy. René smiled and then returned to the maps and rutter of the previous captain. He spread out the map and plotted a new course, one that would take them to Marseilles. “You asked for me, Captain?” James Bailey knocked on the open cabin door. “Oui, come in Mister Bailey, and close the door.” “Sir?” Attired in an older-style navy uniform minus its insignia, James Bailey stiffened to attention, his blue eyes alight with the humor of the situation as he stood before the table. “I felt it proper to begin duty in dress, sir.” René bit back a smile and addressed James with the seriousness the moment called for. “James, we will need to establish and maintain a proper formal relationship so we can get this ship on an even keel, but in private, I expect you to let me know when I am being a horse’s ass. Otherwise, I am bound to enter the realm of stupidity more often than I would like. Do you think you can do that?” René gestured for James to take a seat. With his usual half-smile, James said, “I expect I might be able to do that.” “Bon, let’s get to work.” René spread out a map on the table. “My long-range goal is to build a trading company to challenge the Gaspards—or at least one strong enough to protect itself. My father’s company, Gilbert, Ltd., has five ships at sea, with a new   one in the yards. At some point we will combine
 our strengths, but for now, remaining invisible is our best defense. We will make port at Marseilles. “I thought you planned to return to Bordeaux.” “I have changed my mind. I now believe that it would be foolhardy to challenge Gaspard with little more than I had when I left.” “You have a ship.” “Which will need a good deal of work before it is a threat to anyone.” James appeared distracted, his gaze directed around the room. “I am sorry, have you eaten anything? I will have Andrew bring you something.” “I was looking for something potable. Prerogatives of rank and all that.” James smiled. “There’s brandy in the cabinet.” James rose and walked over to a large mahogany armoire and took out a silver tray on which stood a decanter of brandy and two glasses. “Will you have one?” “Merci, non,” said René still focused on the map. “I am not that sharp under the influence.” “Out here, I expect that’ll change,” James said. “I expect it will, but not today.” René turned the map so that James could read it. “Captain Gordon will go first to London to sell his cargo and get the Albion refitted and then on to Bordeaux to claim the balance of his fee. Unfortunately, ’twill be some time yet before I can risk contacting my family. As hard as it will be on them, I believe we need to let the waters settle over the news of my death first. “I have not given my name to the men aboard this ship, and for now, I think it wise to use a nom de guerre. I shall be René Dalembert. ’Tis a poor way to begin, by lying, but I see no other way around it. I refuse to enslave these men further. If they want to get off at our first port, so be it. I can ask they keep secret my sword prowess, but secrets between two people rarely last. With twenty, well, we will not be in port for long. What I do not want is for young brawneys calling me out to prove themselves.” “’Tis certain I cannot nursemaid the bunch of ’em,” said James. “We will need more men we can trust in on this. The boatswain seems to be reliable.” “I agree. Still, we will have to find at least one other to keep an eye on the men while we’re in a French port. I mean to stop in Marseilles for refit.” René paused, smiling. “And trade goods.” “When did we come by the currency to acquire a cargo?” “When I found the previous captain’s lockbox. We are in business now. We also have enough to pay the men, which may help a bit with their loyalty, given we have had little time to earn it.” There was a knock on the door. René called out, “Come in, Andrew.” Andrew entered, followed by the cook, carrying trays of steaming food, which they put on the table. Downs was not much taller than Andrew, but his clothing was clean, and his demeanor was fastidious, which boded well for the health of the crew. He was a slim man with red hair and a freckled sunburned face. He placed the food on the table with confidence. The aroma from the platters gave proof to the man’s expertise, and his sunburned face meant the crew welcomed his presence above deck. That was not always the case for a less capable cook. René was grateful for this stroke of good fortune. “By your leave, sir,” Mister Downs asked, preparing to withdraw. “Mister Downs, is there any chance you have some chocolate in the larder?” René feared he already knew the answer. “No, sir, but I am certain we can pick some up at our first port. If you let me know your food preferences, I will take care of it.” “Merci. I am not a picky eater, and whatever you have will be fine. How long do we have before we must resupply food and water?” “We’ve got two months, maybe three, ’til we need to make port. We were on our way in when we ran into the Albion. Will there be anything more, sir?” “I can see there is plenty here for me and Mister Bailey, so that will be all for now. Merci, Mister Downs,” René said. Andrew hesitated at the door, and René added, “Andrew, report to the boatswain, and see what he has for you to do.” “Help yourself, James,” René said as he took one of the bowls of stew. “She has been out long enough that we will need to check the hull for shipworm.” “I have already sent one of the men over the side, and we’re working the bilge pumps pretty hard.” James picked up a journey cake from one of the platters. “We will need to put in to refit before long.” “Marseilles is large enough that we should remain unnoticed, and Gilbert Ltd. has a factor there. We will arrange for a cargo as well as obtain information.” René stood and poured himself a small beer. James stood as well. “What are your orders?” “Gather the men together. I want to know where we stand if we are called to battle. Have you had an opportunity to inventory the ship?” “I inventoried the shot and powder first and then the supplies. We’ll inventory what cargo we have next. We have enough powder and shot to get through two engagements. After that, we will be throwing our socks at ’em.” René rolled up the maps and replaced them in their leather tubes. The well-worn leather in his hand brought back the memory of that day on the road to the port, but now was not the time to entertain memories. He cleared his throat. “I make us about five weeks northwest of Marseilles. Let us hope there are no engagements we cannot handle. I will be topside in ten minutes. Assemble the men.” “Aye, aye, Captain,” James said as he left the cabin. René shortly followed him above deck. The men were gathered before the aftcastle. James and John Abel stood on the raised deck facing the men. René joined them and surveyed his crew. “I have decided we will make port in Marseilles in order to refit and take on cargo. Your previous captain has left behind a gift for you. I have found enough gold and silver for us to refit the Seahawk, purchase a cargo, and pay each of you for your trouble.” The men roared their approval. René waited until they quieted and then continued. “Well, Mister Bailey, let us see what we have to work with. S’il vous plait, call the men to quarters.” “Clear for action!” bawled James. The men raced to their previously assigned stations. “What do you think, Mister Bailey? Can we fight?” “We can either fight or run, but not both. We haven’t the men.” “My thought as well. We cannot hope to survive a cannon battle. Our best strategy is to run if we can or, failing that, come in close enough to grapple. Man to man, I believe I can reduce the odds a little.” “A little?” James cocked his eyebrow. “Unfortunately, the odds still do not favor our survival. We will begin fencing lessons this evening.” “Yes, sir,” James said while motioning to the boatswain. A golden trail followed the ship, painting the ocean until it reached the setting sun in a blaze of red gold. René had commanded lanterns be lit so there would be enough light on the deck. Each man was armed with a three-foot length of oak, that being the most prevalent lumber aboard. Not as forgiving as bamboo, oak was still reasonably safe. René didn’t want to accidentally lose or maim any of the men. Until he gauged their proficiency with a sword, they’d spar with oak. “Any man who manages to take this length of oak from my hand will be richer by a gold sovereign before the day is out,” René said, to an increasingly positive murmur from the men. “I intend to teach you how to fence. During these fencing lessons, I will not tolerate anything less than your complete attention, which you will soon find expeditious to give me. I can only teach as I was taught. So, come to en garde, if you know it, and if not, to whatever position you would take to defend yourself. If you learn nothing else but this balanced stance, your life expectancy will increase in a fight.” The men came to a variety of positions with only a handful having any real idea of the basic stance of fencing. René demonstrated en garde. “S’il vous plait, copy this stance as well as you can, and hold it.” René went from man to man, correcting his stance, his arm placement, or both. Then he watched his crew struggle to hold up their bits of oak. After a short time, one man cursed and lowered his wooden sword. “I ain’t standin’ here holdin’ up a bloody piece of wood.” Faster than a blink, René was in front of the man. Smack, the oak was out of the man’s hand and on the deck. He then thrust his own wooden sword into the man’s solar plexus. An eerie silence pervaded the deck, except for the man bent over wheezing, desperately trying to regain his breath. The men there knew full well of their captain’s skills. René addressed them. “If we are attacked, my life will be at stake. I want you to know I am deadly serious when threatened. You will learn to fence properly. It will hurt, but you will learn anyway. The only promise I make to you is that the more you pay attention, the less pain you will receive. Fencing is always painful for someone. Your only choice is who that someone is. Now, s’il vous plait, show me en garde.” The men snapped into their best approximations of en garde, including the first man, who was still gasping to regain his breath. “Bon. Now hold this position until your muscles are more than familiar with it.” René walked among the men, widening a stance here and pushing an arm up there. After a number of minutes, the men began to sweat, no one wanting to be the first to lower that wooden sword. Arms began to shake, but no one gave up. René smiled. He had chosen a good group of men; they could and would learn. “All right, swords at rest,” he called. The men lowered their swords with some quiet inadvertent groaning but they managed to remain standing, their focus on René. “Mister Abel, would you please demonstrate en garde?” While he was the largest man there, John Abel was also the most coordinated. He assumed a close approximation to the proper position for en garde. His balance and familiarity with the position argued for some previous training. “Close, Mister Abel. Very close. Move your
 arm a bit higher. Oui, and widen your stance a bit.” René turned to face the boatswain. Without warning he thrust toward the man’s chest. Abel managed, barely, to parry the thrust. “Bon! Your enemy will not wait to see that you are ready, and neither will I. Because your first position was correct, you were able to block even a thrust from me. We will not be able to go over more than the basics on this voyage, but if you choose to stay with this ship, you will never meet your equal in a sword fight. Now, let us begin practice. Mister Abel, will you help me teach en garde?” “Yes, sir, Captain.” Facing the men, the boatswain bawled, “All right, you dolts, assume en garde.” The men came to the en garde position again, but this time with much greater attention. René and the boatswain went from man to man, correcting both arm and stance until all the men were in correct position. “And now hold that pose.” René walked between the men. Though a few were shaking with muscle fatigue, not one allowed the wooden sword to drop until René permitted them to rest. When he called them to en garde again, the swords went to a much closer approximation of the position, along with an increase in their confidence level. The lesson went on for three hours, and by its completion, the men were thoroughly exhausted. “I have instructed the cook to increase rations, as we intend to be in port within a short time. I am pleased with this first practice session. You are men, not boys, and it will, perhaps, be harder to progress, given that you will have to unlearn such habits as you have already developed. But I assure you, you will get stronger as the lessons continue. “Mister Bailey, a tot of rum for each man this night. They have shown me they deserve it. We have fought our first battle gentlemen, and while we may not have won, we did not lose either.” There was a moment of silence. Unsure how to respond, the men glanced at each other. “Your proper response is, ‘Thank you, Captain,’” said René. “Thank you, Captain,” the men roared. “Mister Bailey, set the watch please. I will take my sightings and then will retire to my cabin.” CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO Marseilles, France RENÉ DALEMBERT had little trouble convincing the Gilbert Ltd. factor in Marseilles he was a trusted business associate of Armand Gilbert. After all, who knew the man better than his own son? After establishing his bonafides, René asked about the possibility of acquiring coffee to trade. The factor gave him a letter of introduction to certain Arab merchants who might be able to arrange the purchase of coffee. Although illegal to export, goods like coffee were always for sale at a price. In return, René agreed to negotiate a cargo for Gilbert Ltd. as well as for himself. As he reined his horse into one of the seedier districts, René loosened his sword within its sheath. In this part of Marseilles one could be attacked for a loaf of bread. At last he approached a rundown warehouse beside a large camel-skin tent. Several robed Arabs sat in front of the tent smoking a strangely shaped communal pipe. The men grew quiet as René dismounted. He tied the reins to a post and walked toward them, stopping within a courteous distance. Several stood, their posture casual, but with their hands never far from their weapons. René nodded and said, “Salaam alaikum.” The reaction was immediate, almost as if he had uttered a magic spell. The men relaxed, and the eldest returned his greeting. “My Arabic is limited,” said René. “I am, however, willing to learn.” “That, young man, is the most powerful thing you will ever say.” The elder stood and crossed the packed earth to stand before René. His French was flawless. “Will you share refreshment with us?” “Merci, my pleasure, sir.” The elder gentleman motioned for René to follow him. “Let us go inside where it is cooler.” The exterior of the tent was stained, and weather worn, but the inside was a riot of color and texture. Beautifully woven carpets were strewn across the floor. Each depicted a different scene from bloody conflicts to pastoral vistas. Colorful silks rippled along the tent walls while aromatic oil lamps created an inviting atmosphere. His host, tall and powerfully built, was no stranger to the sword given his stance: balanced, aware. He wore a simple tunic and dark pants, with only the deep blue gem at the throat of his kaftan as evidence of his power and wealth. Swarthy of face with striking hawk-like eyes that missed nothing, he was a powerful individual, and yet René found great peace in his presence. Unusual, considering the man was a complete stranger. René’s father had taught him the importance of trading relationships, including the host-guest relationship among Arabs, and he was content to remain silent until they completed the obligatory social observances. The gentleman sat on several cushions and motioned for René to do the same. A young woman brought a tray of sweetmeats and finger cakes, and placed it on a carved cedar table between them. At least she appeared young. She was swathed from head to toe in a black burqa, which covered the lower part of her face. They sat quietly as she returned with a pot and two small cups before she bowed and left. The man poured a coffee for René and for himself and then settled back. Keen eyes missed nothing. “Merci.” René sipped the beverage. The coffee was unlike any he had ever tasted. It was hot, sweet, and strong. Being from a winemaking family, René was accustomed to paying attention to the nuances of taste. This was redolent with many levels of flavor. “I believe this is the best coffee I have ever had. My name is René Dalembert, and I have a letter of introduction from Monsieur Desseud at Gilbert Ltd.” René handed the letter to his host. “At your convenience, I would be grateful to discuss possibilities of mutual interest.” “Monsieur, I thank you for your manners. I am Sheikh Ammar Faruq Ghassan, envoy and trade representative from the Sultan, Hamzah al-Rashid of Morocco. In due time, we will indeed speak of many possibilities, but for the moment, perhaps we shall enjoy the coffee and cakes and speak of small things. You appear to be much older than I sense you are. If it is not indelicate, may I ask your age?” The man took a date from a bowl full of exotic fruits. “I am nineteen, monsieur, and although certain experiences have moved me through life a little faster than most, a little faster than I might have liked, I hope my youth will not cause you discomfort or hinder our discussions.” René sipped the coffee. “Have you been gone long from your home?” “Thank you for inquiring, sir. I have been a year and eight months on this particular trip and am preparing to return to Morocco. And you?” “It seems like years, but it has only been shy of three months.” René hesitated. “You seem to be reticent to talk about your past.” “’Tis inconvenient, but there are certain people who will be safer if the knowledge of my existence is not made public. As you surmised, I am without a great deal of experience in the world, but I am confident of my ability to discern honest intent. ’Tis unusual for me to experience this level of trust after only a few moments meeting, but I do not sense danger in you—at least not toward me. “S’il vous plait, allow me to start again. I will not begin this relationship by lying to you. My name is René Gilbert. My father is Armand Gilbert, of Gilbert Ltd. There is a threat that hangs over my family should the fact that I live be discovered. Until I am able to protect those I love, I must keep my continued existence a secret.” René surprised himself by divulging such private information to a complete stranger. Yet his senses, which he trusted implicitly, left him peaceful and at ease. “You have gifted me with a large confidence, and I will not betray your faith. You may call me Ammar, for I am certain we will become the best of friends. You are not the only one who has studied the sword, and I too feel the connection.” René stared at him. “How did you know I studied the sword?” “We are known by the thousand things that accompany each of us as we make our way through life. That you have trained with the sword is evident by the way you walk, the way your head moves, and how your eyes track each movement around you. You were taught by a master, and it will be a pleasure to learn from you, as well as to teach you what small knowledge I have acquired.” The sheikh smiled. “We would be honored for you to stay and dine with us. We have much to discuss.” “Is it possible for me to send a message to my ship?” “Certainly.” The sheikh clapped his hands. The young woman reentered carrying a small table with a tray of writing materials. How did she know he needed writing materials? She glided across the carpets, each step graceful and controlled. René’s awareness expanded the way it did when there was danger, yet his inner voice told him he was safe. The girl never looked at him, but she seemed to see everything within the tent. She set the writing table before him and then placed the tray and paper on it. She arranged the quill, ink, a small bottle of sand, and a wax pot with a candle to heat the seal on the table. Then she bowed and backed out of the tent, each step flowing and silent. René penned a note to James that he was meeting with Sheikh Ammar Faruq Ghassan and that he would return to the ship in the morning. He sprinkled sand over the ink, allowed it to blot, and then folded the paper, sealing it with a bit of wax. René waved the paper to cool the wax. “I would be obliged for this to be delivered to James Bailey of the Seahawk. The ship is anchored on the south bank, but she is beached now, and you will find him and my crew at the Grog house. I have told him I will return in the morning if ’tis not an imposition for me to find someplace to sleep.” “Not at all. I expect you to
 spend many nights with us, as we have a lot to talk about. Akeefa!” The sheikh clapped his hands. The sound of the clap had not yet faded from the air before the girl bowed her way back into the tent. “Show Monsieur Dalembert to a tent where he can rest and refresh himself?” “Yes, Father.” She bowed again and motioned for René to follow her. So, she can talk. René turned to the sheikh. “Merci, I look forward to speaking further.” He followed Akeefa into the fresh air. There were more tents arranged in a large circle behind the large one, and she led him through a maze of pathways to a smaller dwelling at its outer edge. René copied her as she ducked under the overhang. As the larger tent had been, this smaller version was also filled with colorful silks and carpets woven so intricately that from the corner of his eye the animals appeared to move. There was a divan, bowls and pitchers of water for washing, and the customary cakes and coffee. Akeefa stood beside the doorway. “If there is anything you require, you need but ask.” Her voice, like the rest of her, was under her complete control. “Someone will come to take you to my father when it is time to dine.” René nodded. “Merci.” Akeefa nodded and turned to leave. “Am I permitted to talk with you?” She laughed. “When you have something interesting to say. Until then, make yourself at home.” René sank into the cushions and then poured himself a glass of water. He reviewed his meeting with the sheikh and his daughter. An exciting sense of anticipation signaled that something valuable was, or soon would be, within his reach. Almost like finding a key to a door you never knew existed, a purpose began to coalesce. He poured warm water from the pitcher into a bowl, lifted the soft cloth from the table, and began to wash himself. The sun was just starting to set as a lone voice called the Musselmen to prayer. Torches blazed throughout the encampment when a young man requested entrance to René’s tent. Dressed in a dark blue kaftan of rich brocade, he looked to be about René’s age. His black hair and beard were neatly trimmed. “Come,” he said. Each took the measure of the other. The young Arab smiled, and though that sardonic smile spoke volumes about his perception of the world, René sensed a quiet center that spoke even louder of his martial skills. As he stood to follow, René paused and considered his sword lying on the cushions. The young man followed René’s gaze before he spoke, “Allow me to introduce myself. I am Khalid Rafiq Ghassan, youngest son of my beloved father, the sheikh.” “René Dalembert, and I am honored to meet you,” René said with a slight bow. “Forgive my intrusive suggestion, but I realize you are not yet familiar with our customs. Taking a weapon into a meal would be…” He paused. “…impolite.” “I agree and apologize for the thought. As of late, I have felt more comfortable with the sword than without it.” “It is the times we live in, but as my father says, balance in all things. Still, I must admit that I am as yet woefully inept at finding that balance, let alone maintaining it.” Khalid put on an imitation of his father. “Eating is a joyful recreation of life, and the symbols of death are not welcome at this activity.” “I agree with your father and would be pleased to leave that symbol behind for longer than dinner.” “Come, he also believes in punctuality, and I am hungry,” Khalid laughed as they walked toward dinner. René returned to the large tent now bright with candles. The long table in the center was covered with white silk and laden with steaming dishes both Moroccan and French. He was ushered to a seat at the left hand of the sheikh, and he bowed as he approached the chair. Khalid went to take his seat to the right of the sheikh beside another young man who could only be his older brother. As much as he resembled Khalid, the brother was a younger version of the sheikh. He was a large man with the same nose and hawk-like piercing eyes, and he, too, radiated power. “You are surprised to see the table, perhaps?” said the sheikh. René nodded as he seated himself. “I am. You must forgive me. My education concerning the cultures of the world is sadly inadequate.” “Not at all.” The sheikh sipped mint tea from a clear glass. “I have seen many peoples and many traditions. Some deserve to be preserved. Some, however, can be a bit tedious—like sitting on the floor. I find at my age that a comfortable chair is far superior to a pillow, no matter how soft the pillow is. Would you like tea?” “Merci, I would.” The quantity and variety of dishes, along with their pungent aromas, assailed his senses and his mouth watered. Tagines of chicken and lamb, bowls of couscous, and platters of flat bread filled every space. For a brief moment, he was back in Bordeaux at one of the elaborate holiday dinners Marie had prepared for them. The sheikh’s daughter glided to his side and poured tea from a long-spouted teapot. “Merci.” “It is an honor to serve you, sir.” Only her eyes were visible behind the burqa, but her voice belied her words. “I am certain it is,” he said in the same vein. She shook her head and strode away. Saucy was the only way to describe her. His awareness of her somehow reminded him of the Maestro. As if he were in the presence of barely restrained threat. Ridiculous. Another serving woman filled his plate while he waited politely to begin the meal. The sheikh raised his tea glass. “I would like to welcome Monsieur Dalembert into our home. René Dalembert has come to us through some unfortunate circumstances, and who amongst us has not encountered unfortunate circumstances of their own? He is a merchant like ourselves, and perhaps we may find business that is to our mutual profit.” As he spoke René’s last name, he turned to René, smiled, and winked. “René, I would like you to meet my sons. On my right is my eldest, Abdul Karim, whose expertise is animals, horses specifically. And next to him…” Before the sheikh could continue, there was a commotion at the front of the tent followed by the sound of metal on metal. The sound was familiar to René who was in motion with the first clash of steel. On his feet, having already snatched up the silverware and serving utensils from around his plate, he darted in front of the table, and placed himself between the door of the tent and his host. Black-turbaned men waving scimitars charged into the space. The short, curved swords were perfect for a confined area such as this. René needed a better weapon. He threw the heaviest of the serving pieces, striking an attacker in the eye. The assassin shrieked and grabbed his face. René then struck him on the breastbone. In the man’s moment of paralysis, René snatched his sword, ran him through with it, and then reclaimed his position in front of the sheikh. All of this took perhaps fifteen seconds—but for René, time was never a factor. You will always have enough time to do what must be done. The Maestro’s words settled René, like a reassuring hand on his shoulder. A commotion in front of the tent drew René’s attention. Although he sensed the tide change, there would soon be more men surrounding them. This was a well-planned assassination. The sheikh’s sons, armed with daggers, held their own, and for now the stream of assassins entering the tent had ceased. Two of the killers had disengaged and charged René and the sheikh. Already moving, René touched both with the scimitar to redirect their attention away from the sheikh. Even though they were trained swordsmen, their faces registered shock at being pinked so easily. They turned to René, and then shifted their positions so that they now flanked him. The one on his right struck first with a thrust that René parried. As the man disengaged, René threw the eating knife from his left hand. The man fell back, clutching his throat. The other assassin, who from his expression appeared confident that this distraction would be the right time to attack, stepped in with a slashing cut at René’s head. His confidence was misplaced. He died with his heart split by René’s counter-stroke. The sheikh had armed himself from one of the fallen men and waded into the fray. So much for defending my host. René smiled to himself. Khalid and Abdul Karim were outnumbered but clearly at home wielding their swords with control and skill. The expression on Abdul Karim’s face was almost gleeful. By now the attackers had realized their imminent defeat. Half their number were dead, and with no reinforcements, they panicked. As one, they turned and fled the tent, followed by René, the sheikh, and his sons. Torches lit the space before the tent as bright as day. René never forgot the sight that met his eyes as he emerged. At least fifteen men lay scattered dead or dying in the courtyard before him. Moving like a ghost in the middle of the remaining assassins was the girl who had served him. The burqa was gone, and long black hair cascaded down a white silk shirt to the waistband of her black pantaloons. She wielded a curved sword with a skill unmatched by any man he knew with the exception of the Maestro. René forced his amazement aside and joined the fight. He moved deliberately, killing the men that surrounded her, even as she cut them down from within the circle. Within moments, the remaining assailants threw down their swords and flung themselves to their knees. She stepped back and then turned to René. Her expression softened as the two kindred souls recognized each other. She smiled, gave a brief nod, and then was gone. The sheikh tended Khalid, who had received a minor wound. But for that, the party had escaped unscathed. René stood alert as Abdul Karim walked toward him. “You are a remarkable fighter, and it has been an honor to share a conflict with you. Are you wounded?” asked the elder brother. “Non, I seem to be all in one piece. How is your
 brother?” “Just a scratch. We inflicted greater than that on him when we were children. Come, let us clean up and then we can continue with dinner. A little late perhaps, but Father is strict when it comes to meals, especially when we have welcome guests.” Abdul Karim took René’s arm and led him to another tent. “Who was that young woman? I have only seen one other who could handle a sword like that.” “Oh, that is Akeefa, my sister, a continuing embarrassment to us all. Yet you are right, for she can defeat any of us with a sword. I apologize to you for the indignity of her actions. I assure you she will be reprimanded, not that it will do much good.” Abdul Karim held open a tent flap for René. CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE THE NEXT morning, René awoke to the awareness that someone was standing outside of the tent, but he sensed no danger. “Do you wish to enter?” René asked. “S’il vous plait,” a young boy’s voice answered. “Give me a minute.” René rose and pulled on his breeches. “Enter.” The tent flap opened, and a young boy of eleven or twelve entered and placed a tray on the short table next to him. On the tray was a pitcher with steam rising from it and a beautiful porcelain bowl whose glaze depicted the sun on an oasis. There was also a pristine white towel. The boy bowed to him and recited in flawless French, “The master inquires if you would join him for breakfast.” “I would be pleased to,” said René. “Allow me a minute to wash and finish dressing.” “I will wait outside.” René walked over and dipped the towel into the warm water. The evening had stretched into the early hours of the morning, with course after course interspaced with that strong, sweet coffee. In the end, as tired as he should have been, he was doubtful sleep would come to him. With all that had transpired, he was filled with a new kind of excitement, certain that he was in the right place at the right time. He glanced in the small mirror as the Maestro’s words filled his thoughts. There will be times when you will be able to sense the flow of your destiny. Sometimes a choice will be required between one road and another, but more often, there will be only one path in front of you. Take strength and confidence from this awareness. We were never meant to wander aimlessly through life. René had asked whether one could call forth the awareness at will. And the Maestro’s sardonic reply: “Perhaps with a great deal more attention and practice than you are presently capable of. As you may use everything around you as a weapon, so may you employ every bit of information that you are able to glean from each moment.” The “what” or the “how” of his life’s purpose still eluded him, but for the first time he was confident of its direction. He tugged on his shirt and completed dressing, excited and ready to experience whatever awaited him. René joined the boy outside. Breakfast was in the same tent as the previous night’s dinner. As he entered, the sheikh’s voice filled the space. “Come in, come in, monsieur. Come sit here by me. I trust you slept well.” “Quite well, sir.” René took a seat to the right of the sheikh. “And you, sir, did you sleep well?” “As well as an old man with numerous responsibilities will. I must say, I slept better knowing you were here.” The sheikh passed a cup of coffee to René. “You are surrounded by well-trained people, not the least of which is your daughter, Akeefa. Am I permitted to speak of her? If not, I apologize. My experience is not yet extensive enough to keep me from being rude.” “You are right that you lack experience, but you do not lack manners or perception. Not speaking about a problem will not persuade it to go away, not that I would wish my lovely daughter to go away.” The sheikh paused in thought. “I remember when, as a child, she informed me she no longer wished to hear the word ‘no.’ I am quite certain she employs selective hearing even today. Do you wish to marry my daughter?” The unexpected question left René speechless. The sheikh sipped his coffee and waited for a response. “I…” René closed his mouth. This was an important answer. He paused and centered himself as if going into battle. The sheikh smiled. “I realize, sir, that yours is a serious question and will be a foundation of our future dealings. You honor me that you would even consider me a possibility, for despite my inexperience, I am aware of your love for your daughter. I have, however, a previous commitment to a young woman who I was forced to leave behind. And so, I must answer you no; I am not free to marry Akeefa.” René fervently hoped he had not offered offense. “Thank you for your clear and unequivocal answer. You are refreshingly without guile, a shortcoming I will have to correct if we are to join our fortunes. Still, it is pleasant to hear an unvarnished truth. I have trusted you with my life, and now I choose to trust you with that which I value more than my life. If you were not the man you are, I would send you out to sea immediately, for I believe Akeefa has chosen you.” René sat back, unable to speak. The sheikh smiled. “I do not believe, however, there are enough seas on the globe to prevent Akeefa from fulfilling her desires. At least, there have not been up to now. I cannot fathom what kind of relationship you and my daughter will forge, but of one thing I am certain: it will prove interesting. I wish you success and survival. I do not wish you peace, for you will have none. Still, you are young, and peace is not such an important thing to the young. That brings me to the point. I must tell you that while it is our tradition to eat first and then discuss business afterward, I must forward my daughter’s request, for I fear for our safety, let alone our peaceful dining, if I delay.” The sheikh straightened up. “Akeefa asks if you are willing to spar with her after breakfast.” “What do you think?” asked René.

Baker, Elliott. The Sun God's Heir: Return Book One (Kindle Locations 40-2711). Hypatia Press. Kindle Edition. 

“Such wisdom in one so young,” said the sheikh. “If you were any other man, I would advise against it so strongly I would be moved to tears if you should decide to accept. But you are not any other man, and while I promise you it will be educational, I do not fear for your physical safety.” “I notice you specified my physical safety.” René tried to control his facial expression, but the smile slipped out. “And what of my mental, emotional, and spiritual safety?” “Ah, my boy, there are no guarantees in life.” The sheikh laughed. “I believe that there are things she can teach you and things you may teach her. There is risk in every moment. Surely, you have been taught that. There is also reward inherent within each moment of risk. I have asked, and now at least I can relax and enjoy my breakfast. I might advise that you do not eat a heavy meal this morning.” If René’s sudden lack of appetite was any indication, a large meal was not a concern. A servant escorted René to a fencing arena, its boundaries marked off by poles topped with white silk flags. The warehouse on one side and the tents on the other three served as walls. A rack filled with swords and edged weapons from many different cultures stood along one side. As he was the first to arrive, René walked over and inspected the swords to find one that suited his needs. There was a cutlass, shorter than a scimitar but heavier. It would be a good match to the curved scimitar Akeefa used the previous night. He stretched out, pleased with the sword’s balance. He went through a series of exercises and had just finished when she entered. Though he had his back to her, he knew the moment she stepped into the space. He turned and bowed to her, and she returned the gesture. Akeefa was dressed like the night before in a long sleeved white silk shirt over black pantaloons. Her hair was an infinite black shimmer tied behind her. She was beautiful, with flashing dark eyes and a heart-shaped face, but not in a fragile, fashionable way—more like a wild panther, sleek and deadly. Her drop earrings, each set with a fiery ruby, sparkled in the sun as she turned. He backed away from the weapons so she might choose a blade for the session. Neither of them spoke, yet they seemed to have exchanged a staggering amount of information. Their fields of thought and emotion impinged upon each other, creating a line of resistance that almost crackled. René cocked an eyebrow when Akeefa chose the cutlass, a twin to the one he held. His impulse was to question her choice of weapons. Once again the Maestro’s voice played in René’s mind. Do not waste time on what you do not know. He backed off to allow her space to loosen up, but it appeared she was ready to begin. René cleared his throat. “What rules would you like to follow?” “Whatever rules you feel constrained to follow or not will be fine.” “May I ask our objective?” “Why, to know who we are of course.” She swung the cutlass once through a short arc. “Are you ready to begin?” René shifted his consciousness as he came to en garde. She did the same. This match is going to be interesting. The only other person he ever encountered that exhibited the same level of intense mental focusing was the Maestro. In between that thought and the next, she attacked—just like the Maestro. René gracefully turned, allowing her thrust to go past his chest. More than just the knowledge of who they were was at stake here. Facing her, he breathed deeply and slowed the world even further. She shifted with him and attacked again. Their swords clashed with that unique music heard only from the hearts of fine steel. The cutlass was more of a brute force weapon than the rapier. He admired the effortless way she moved the heavy blade. Patience is a necessary skill in life, for the impatient lion rarely eats so well as the one who waits. René settled into himself and reached out to anticipate her movements. He was content to wait until she tired. The only problem was that she failed to tire. Because of the additional weight of the sword, cutlass contests were usually short. In all of his years of working with the Maestro, René had never seen him tire. Was there some skill this slip of a girl knew that he had never learned? Her speed and power reminded him of the master, and he had only beaten the Maestro once. His emotions signaled that he should be afraid, but the emotion of fear was as familiar to him as his own hand. He had befriended it long ago. The Maestro had made certain of that. So why did he feel this way? Pay attention to that which is out of the ordinary. There are no accidents. Everything must have a cause. Many forces, not all within the physical realm, can threaten the self that burns within you. Fear is but an emotional response to disorder. Through the use of your will, you can ignore the incoming emotional signals, maintaining the integrity of your vital field which is crucial to your ability to focus. She was mentally manipulating his personal vital field and through it, his emotions. Instead of the fear that would have been the natural response to such knowledge, René experienced a joyous surge of wonder and a fierce desire to know this skill. First, he had to disengage from the mental onslaught. Risking a slashed hip, he lifted one of her earrings into the air with a lightning flick of his sword. He deftly caught the earring and pocketed it. She stopped and demanded, “Give me back my earring.” “Teach me how you are manipulating my emotions.” She attacked, and the mental assault doubled. René gave himself over completely to that quiet center, moving with speed and grace into each thrust and parry. He no longer felt the pressure of her thoughts. Feeling and perception had been replaced by knowing. This was where the Maestro had been leading him, and it had taken this girl—this master of the sword, he corrected himself—to help him cross into that state of emotionless motion. If he could have experienced an emotion in that moment, it would have been gratitude. With another flick, he released the other earring from its bondage, then pulled it from the air and pocketed it. Again she stopped, her lips drawn tight. “You will regret that.” “Not as much as you will regret allowing anger into your space,” he said, as he prepared for her attack. Instead, Akeefa paused. The light of recognition blossomed within her dark eyes. She is truly a master. He brought his sword to a rest position only a tick off en garde. “You were not influenced by my mental assault. How did you manage that?” she asked. “How did you create the effect?” he countered. Akeefa smiled, and it was as if there had never before been a sunrise. René quailed. He recognized a greater threat than any sword. He relaxed further into that unique sense of stillness and returned her smile. Every moment of their relationship would be fraught with danger for both of them, but the rewards would far outweigh the risk. “Let me put the swords away, and we will have tea with Father.” She released the en garde position and waited, a half smile on her face. René reversed the sword and offered her its hilt. Complete and implicit trust was necessary if this relationship was to be anything but deadly. She turned and replaced the weapons on the rack, but not before carefully wiping each one down with a cloth. A master always takes care of his tools. The voice echoed back to René as they walked from the practice arena. CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR AKEEFA SAT before the mirror. When gazed upon from certain angles, the gold filigree dolphins frolicked around the glass, their delicate artistry a joyful metaphor of freedom. Her father received the mirror as a gift from Louis XIV. Citing his lack of appreciation for its unique beauty, she promptly appropriated the piece. Her servant’s sour expression added little to the finely crafted mirror. Sabah brushed Akeefa’s hair with angry strokes as if the brush was at fault for her young charge’s recent adventure, uncovered and unrepentant. Sabah could no more have left the tent without her veil than she could have voluntarily ceased breathing. Theirs was an old argument and they had agreed to disagree. Well, at least Akeefa had agreed. Poor father. He had given in to her young demands for a sword, and the training to go with it, far too easily. He expected her to get bored rather than go on to outstrip every available teacher in Morocco by the age of thirteen. The Spanish swordmaster came afterward. At first he had been insulted by the request that he train a woman, but eventually, once he finally condescended to meet her, he had agreed to train Akeefa. He had left that first meeting visibly shaken. He was the one who showed Akeefa how dangerous her anger was, how any denial of her freedom would provoke it. René had identified that weakness in one session, and that was mortifying. The thought of him was exciting. He was too strong to be susceptible to pressure. He had attained the power of the calm center. She too had found that calm center, but was unable to remain there. He could help her. If only she could work out how to encourage him to do so. For the first time, she was unsure how to go about fulfilling a desire. The situation was unsettling and frustrating, but even that was somewhat exciting. She did love a challenge. “He is beautiful, is he not?” Akeefa turned toward Sabah. “How am I expected to brush your hair if you keep moving? Be still, child.” Sabah continued brushing while her lips moved as she counted silently. Akeefa dutifully faced forward. “But he is, you must agree?” “He is a kafir and beneath your notice.” “Oh, stop being so old-fashioned, Sabah. We have traveled throughout Europe. Have you never even looked outside your own tent?” “The only reason I would have to look outside my tent would be to empty the chamber pot, and I have never found anything of great interest
 at the end of that walk.” Sabah placed the ivory handled brush onto an engraved silver tray. “Well, I think he is beautiful. Such eyes, and the way he smiles. Father told me he is betrothed, but unable to return home. I have not persuaded Father to tell me why yet—honor and such—but I will. I will know everything about him.” She stared into the mirror, not really seeing her reflection. “Come dear, it has been a long day, and you will need your sleep.” Sabah fluffed the mattress and turned down the coverlet. She continued tidying up, moving a pillow here, folding a blanket there. “It has been a long and exciting day, and there is no way I can fall asleep. Sabah, go ahead and find your bed. Perhaps meditation will allow me to put this day to rest.” “But surely if you lie down…” “Thank you for taking such good care of me. Good night, dear Sabah.” Akeefa kissed her on the cheek before she gently pushed the woman out of the tent. Akeefa chose her favorite pillow and sat upon it, back straight and legs crossed. With her hands comfortably in her lap, she moved through the levels of her mind, stilling each one until she was in that place of no place, that time of no time. Her breathing slowed, and while her awareness narrowed, paradoxically it expanded as well. In her mind’s eye, she was aware of every spark of life within the camp as if looking on a velvet night sky filled with fireflies. Tonight, however, the meditation refused to go easily. There was a light of great intensity within the camp, a fire that made even her father’s vital field seem dim by comparison. Her intuition told her René would be aware of any attempt to make direct mental contact. To do so uninvited was unacceptable, a gross invasion of privacy, and besides, coercion would destroy what she hoped to build. She found herself abruptly back within her tent, the candles having hardly burned down at all. She crawled beneath the coverlet and resigned herself to a sleepless night. René awoke at dawn when someone passed close by his tent. Last night was a late night with the sheikh and his sons as they discussed their proposed trading venture. The sultan, Moulay al-Rashid, needed weapons to consolidate his rule. While in Marseilles they would purchase flintlocks and then sail to Malaga to pick up a shipment of the finest Toledo swords. Making port in Larache, Morocco, the weapons would be sent overland to the sultan in Fez. The Seahawk would then continue on to Casablanca to sell her remaining cargo. René had spent enough time beside his father that his negotiating skills were better than his youth might have indicated. Still, he was in the presence of a master. The smile on the sheikh’s face proved René had presented himself well. Their agreed upon plan was for him to increase his trading fleet under the auspices of the Sultan. He had also received permission to use the fencing ground for his own practice. René rose and headed there. In the future, he would ask when the space would be available so as not to impose on Akeefa’s schedule, but for now, it was empty. He approached the rack of gleaming weapons. He chose his favorite, the rapier, and removed it from its velvet niche. It was a beautiful piece made of Spanish steel with a gold-filigreed bell guard. He picked it up and tested it. As expected, its balance was perfect. René warmed up in preparation for the exercise regimen the Maestro had created for him. Lunges to stretch the large muscles in his legs. Then a series of exercises that constricted one muscle group after another until his body told him it was ready. He paused to remove his shirt before it was drenched with sweat. He stood with the rapier down and to the side and focused his mind until he was secure within that unique mental perspective that allowed him to work through his exercises while viewing them through the Maestro’s critical eye. His first thrust cut through the air. After a short time, he sensed her watching, as if the quality of the light had changed, for her approach had been silent. He smiled to himself and continued deeper into his workout, his upper body glistening with sweat. There was no beginning nor ending to any movement he made, each one gliding into the next—perfectly controlled, completely at ease, and yet radiating power—as though he commanded the very air, the way the sun struck the blade. A glorious dance, each step was filled with the years of pain and effort demanded. Finally, it came to an end. There was no transition between action and rest. All movement simply ceased. He turned to her and bowed. “I am sorry if I have taken up your time and space.” She remained still as if frozen. René stood close enough to her to experience the rush of anger and embarrassment filling her as she suppressed her weakness, fighting to regain control. “I am sorry to have intruded, but I could not turn away,” she finally said. “You are welcome to watch. You have much to teach me. We will need to know each other much better, if we are to be of any value to each other as teachers or students.” He walked over to the sword rack and wiped down the rapier. She followed him. With her gaze fixed on the ground, she spoke. “I am not so certain I have anything to teach you, but I would formally ask to become your student.” “S’il vous plait, look at me, Akeefa.” She slowly raised her eyes to meet his. Her body was motionless, but René sensed the war taking place within her. A war fraught with violence barely restrained. René settled into that focused calm that presaged battle. The threat his psyche had detected, however, was aimed not at him but at herself. “Akeefa, the master-student relationship is much easier than that of master-to-master. No one reaches our level without a fierce sense of self. I learned that one never completely tames the self, for it is at home, whereas we are merely visitors. The only way for us to learn from each other is to place our lives completely into the hands of the other. Trust is the one road we may walk together and live, for we are each death incarnate, and it will accompany us wherever we go. The moment one of us steps from that road, one of us will die.” Silence filled the space between them as they faced each other and began the process of disrobing the soul. A tear slid down her cheek. The tear was an expansion of awareness, not weakness. His overwhelming emotion was joy at the exchange of something so precious. Only a moment passed, yet it could have been a thousand years. The bond forged in that instant could not have been any stronger had it taken millennia to build. There was nothing more to say. Words were, after all, a poor medium of exchange. René finished wiping down the blade, put his shirt on, and together they walked from the fencing ground. CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE RENÉ GLANCED around the Seahawk’s deck at the purposeful chaos. “Mister Abel, report,” he said, while he kept a careful eye on the supplies coming aboard. James oversaw the loading of the gunpowder and lead shot. The job was a tricky business. More than one ship had sunk in port because of carelessness with gunpowder. A stray spark could be disastrous. The Seahawk’s refit had taken four weeks to complete. René had wanted new swivel guns for the forecastle and aft, and the Seahawk now boasted two falconets, commonly referred to as ‘murderers.’ Able to sweep a deck with grape shot, they were a strong addition to the traditional broadside. In addition to the guns, René intended to train as lethal a group of fighters as there was on the seven seas. He now had an almost full complement of sailors, and with the men the sheikh was bringing, the Seahawk would be a dangerous ship to interfere with. “All crew present or accounted for, sir,” the boatswain said briskly. “What is our current roster?” “We are at eighty-one including you, sir.” “More than I expected. How deep did you have to dig to find that many?” René smiled. “Seems there are rumors of plague, and most of ’em were more than happy to get out. I had the two cabins refitted as per your instructions, and we added another for the servant. Would you like to inspect them?” “I will. Our guests are used to a bit more accommodation than is usual at sea, and I mean to make them comfortable.” The sheikh, Akeefa, and Khalid were sailing with René aboard the Seahawk while Abdul Karim went overland to purchase swords. The Seahawk was to rendezvous with him in Malaga to collect him and the Sultan’s weapons. “Have we loaded the alcohol?” “Yes, sir, both the brandy and wine,” John said. “They’ll hold us in good stead once we reach Malaga.” “Where is the lad, Andrew?” René asked as he descended below. “Mister Bailey’s got him working in the hold, packing the tight spaces.” He followed René. As they approached the sailors working, René yelled to be heard over the noise of loading. “Mister Bailey, do you have a moment, sir?” James Bailey completed his orders to the crew loading barrels of fresh water before walking to René. “Yes, Captain.” “I am glad Andrew has decided to remain with us. Has he communicated with his family?” René asked. “Yes, sir. As per your orders, I helped him write to them. We have received no word from them yet, but I expect they will want to see some of those wages. He’ll need some work on his letters, but we have time. He’s a good lad and a hard worker. Don’t worry, I will keep an eye on him.” “Excellent. Carry on Mister Bailey.” René strode toward the hatch. “Mister Abel, I would like to inspect the cabins set aside for the sheikh and his daughter.” “Aye, aye, Captain.” James turned back toward a load of supplies being winched below deck. René followed the boatswain down the new stairs built to replace the ladders. The passageway was still quite narrow, but the two existing cabins had been enlarged and a third one added. Akeefa had insisted Sabah’s cabin be next to hers. René
 inspected the cabin, satisfied his guests would be as comfortable as was possible aboard ship. The cabins were small but well-appointed with carpets and wall tapestries, along with sea bunks, desks, and chairs. Meals would be taken with René in the captain’s cabin. “That will be all, Mister Abel,” René said. “Thank you, sir. I will report to Mister Bailey when we’re ready to sail.” The boatswain backed out of the cabin. There was a moment of quiet when the incessant hammering stopped. René paused for a second to consider the voyage ahead of them. A shrill whistle, the boatswain’s signal that their guests had arrived, pulled him from his reverie. René took one last look around then went out, closing the door behind him. He made his way above deck. The loading had stopped and the men crowded the rail to get a look at the passengers. René signaled to James. “The men will have plenty of opportunity to meet our guests. I would like to be away with the tide.” “Aye, Captain. I will see to it. Excuse me, sir.” In the blink of an eye, James grabbed the closest man hanging over the gunwale and hoisted him over the side. “The next man I see whose hands are touching that railing will find himself swimming back to Marseilles after we leave port.” The men snatched their hands off the gunwale as if it was made of molten lead. As one, they quickly returned to their allotted tasks. René watched the sheikh, Akeefa, and Khalid approach the dock. Sabah and a group of ten men accompanied them. The party dismounted. “Permission to come aboard, sir?” the sheikh called. “Permission granted, sir, and welcome.” René nodded to Akeefa. Their eyes met. They had agreed she would act the role of the dutiful daughter and remain covered according to her traditions. René had promised to find a way for her to exercise, but it would have to wait until they were under way. “This is the boatswain, John Abel. He will show you to your cabins. We expect to depart on the afternoon’s tide.” René passed the sheikh, Akeefa, and Sabah over to the boatswain and went to find James. Khalid was in charge of the sheikh’s men and would facilitate their integration. Although Khalid was no younger than René, he still sported a youthful aura of adventure and reckless confidence. Given his new mantle of responsibility, René felt—and apparently, appeared—years older. “Khalid, I would like you to meet Mister James Bailey. Mister Bailey is the lieutenant aboard the Seahawk, and as such is next below myself in authority. You and your men will be under his direct command,” René said. “Is this acceptable?” Khalid straightened and bowed, first to René then to James. “I will be pleased to accept your authority, and that of Mister Bailey. Three of my men speak French, two speak Portuguese, and Mister Haddad, well, I have yet to find a language he does not understand. Due to my father’s persistence, I speak French as well as English and a small amount of Dutch. We will work hard both to be of service to you and to learn the predominant language aboard so we can be useful should difficulties arise.” “Merci, Khalid.” René turned to James. “I must see to the comfort of the sheikh and his daughter. S’il vous plait, settle and assign Khalid and his men.” “Aye, aye, Captain.” There were bound to be problems at first, but René was confident they would come together as a crew. Akeefa’s unmistakable voice raged as René approached the hatch. Those ‘difficulties’ seemed to be showing up sooner than later. He hurried toward the ruckus. “How can you expect me to remain day and night in this tiny cell?” Akeefa yelled. The sheikh was calm, at least outwardly. “My dear, this is not so large a ship. If we are to have room for cargo, passengers must give up space.” “Let the crew give up space.” “Akeefa, you know the crew does not have cabins, and neither does your brother. I believe my cabin is larger than yours. If you wish to exchange with me then that will be fine.” The sheikh led her into his quarters. “This is not much better.” René spoke from the doorway. “Akeefa.” She turned to him and immediately quieted down. The sheikh’s eyes widened in amazement. He had been about to speak but instead remained silent and backed farther into the cabin giving the two more space. “You may have the captain’s cabin which is located mid deck aft, but you will have to abide me coming in and out, for I will need the chart table. I will be able to work topside, but not if the weather turns foul. When your father and my officers and I need to meet to discuss business, your presence will be too distracting, so you will need to use your father’s cabin or the smaller cabin then, but I am certain we can work something out.” “May I see your cabin?” “Of course. Follow me.” René led the way up the stairs to the captain’s cabin. He opened the door, and motioned for her to enter. Akeefa stepped inside. René sensed the battle within her. Clearly she needed to retreat from an unwinnable position without losing whatever dignity she had left. “In truth, ’tis not that much larger than my father’s cabin.” “I am sorry, but there is no extra room on a ship this size.” “It becomes clear that the primary purpose of the ships I traveled on has been to transport my family in comfort.” She inspected the furniture in the cabin. “What do you suggest?” “That you trade cabins with your father, and he in turn will trade with me. As he and I are partners in this venture, I do not believe he will be inconvenienced having me use the chart table when necessary, and you will have your privacy and a somewhat larger space.” René led her back down into the passageway. “Thank you. I cannot promise anything, but I will do my best,” Akeefa said as she followed him to her father. “Father, you must take the captain’s cabin, since you are the elder here. I will make do with your cabin.” “Where will the captain sleep?” The sheikh frowned. “Oh, he assures me he will be most comfortable in the cabin originally assigned to me. He will, however, have to use the table in your cabin for meetings and such, but I felt certain you would not mind,” Akeefa said. “Sabah, where’s Sabah? We have much to do to make this boat livable.” The sheikh glanced at René, who nodded. Resigned, the sheikh walked toward the stairs to go above decks. He was wise enough to move out of harm’s way. “Akeefa, we leave on the tide. Is there anything else you require? ” René asked. “Is it possible for me to exercise?” “I have asked James to find space in the hold, but I will not know for sure until we are underway for a day or so. We are not at final trim yet. The hold must be balanced so we do not capsize in a strong wind. ’Tis also my intention to train the men to fence. Against a larger ship or a man-of-war, we are at a disadvantage in both the number of cannon and the weight of lead we can throw, so I must find advantages where I can. I would love to add your expertise to their training, but I do not think your father or brother will allow it.” The moment the word ‘allow’ left his lips, his connection with Akeefa signaled his mistake. He had inadvertently dropped a grenade. He backed up a step and waited for it to explode. “Allow?” “You know what I meant,” he interjected, before she gained headway on the thought. “There is a certain propriety that must be followed. You must understand the difficulties in having a single woman aboard.” “Sabah is not married.” “Non, but then she is not beautiful, either. I know you do not want to make this harder than it must be. We shall talk it over with your father and brother and see what will be possible and what will not.” He moved toward the stairs, then turned and caught her eye. “I know what you want, and you may trust me to do my utmost to help you obtain it.” Akeefa uncovered her face and smiled. “If you will excuse me, I have work topside that must be attended to.” His heart rate increased and along with it, a strange pervading confusion. A fast retreat was in his best interest. A cacophony of gulls wheeled around the Seahawk as she glided from the quay. René glanced over at James who stood near the center mast, inspecting each crewman while issuing a steady stream of familiar orders. As boatswain, John Abel seconded those orders, increasing the volume of each with the aid of a powerful voice pitched to pull the cleats out of the gunnels. “Show ’em how we belay those lines,” he bawled to a crewman standing near Khalid and his men. The man muttered. “I ain’t showin’ no land lubbin’ Musselman how to tie a knot.” Apparently, Khalid had overheard the boatswain’s command because he walked over to the seaman. “My men and I would appreciate your assistance.” “Do you see any camels?” the man said. “No.” “Then stay out of the way, Musselman.” The sailor pushed past Khalid and swaggered toward the sheets. René’s curiosity peaked. He remained behind the capstan and watched. Khalid followed the man to once again stand before him. Reaching over and pulling one of the belaying pins from the pin rail, he casually held it in front of the seaman. “I believe you were ordered to show us how to tie the lines off to these.” “Well, I will tell ya what to do with that pin. Stick it…” Before the sailor said another word, Khalid turned his back on him and, using his body to shield his actions, he rammed the belaying pin into the sailor’s solar plexus. He turned back to face the sailor and swung the pin again its movement so swift that naught but a blur was visible until it connected with the man’s skull behind his ear. The sailor dropped, unconscious, to the deck. Khalid casually placed the belaying pin back into its slot and walked over to the boatswain. “Mister Abel, the seaman tasked with assisting us appears to be indisposed. Would it be possible to assign someone else? We are eager to be of service to the ship.” “What happened?” “I think the man had perhaps
 too much to drink before leaving port. He was saying something about camels when he struck his head. I do not believe he is permanently injured.” Khalid kept his gaze on the boatswain. Abel glanced in René’s direction, fighting a grin. “That has been known to happen, but I will make sure it don’t happen from here on. Abbot,” he called to a seaman in the rigging. “Get down here. I got a job for you.” Abbot climbed down the rigging and then presented himself before the boatswain. “This is Khalid Ghassan and those are his men.” The boatswain nodded toward the group. “You will stay with these men until their nautical skills meet those of the rest of the crew. These are fighting men, and if we get into it, you will be very glad to have them aboard. The lieutenant has requested we make these men part of the crew. It would make Mister Bailey very unhappy if that were not to happen. Am I making myself perfectly clear?” “Yes, sir.” “Mister Ghassan, I have every confidence in you and your men. I do not believe we should experience any more difficulties.” “Thank you Mister Abel.” Khalid bowed to the seaman. “Mister Abbot, we were ordered to belay some lines, and welcome your assistance.” Abbot put his knuckle to his forehead, saluting the boatswain, and then followed Khalid. John Abel looked back at René and caught his nod. Akeefa paced the small cabin like a caged tigress. Unable to remain cooped up, she dressed appropriately putting on a hijab and went above deck for some air. Once on deck, her eyes widened in disbelief. Khalid was on his knees helping the sailors wash the deck. He noticed her watching him and grinned. After saying a couple of words to the others he joined her. “Good afternoon, Akeefa.” “Whatever are you doing?” “Washing the gun carriage.” “I saw that, but why are you performing such menial work?” “The efficiency of the cannon is dependent on the ease with which the carriage moves, so it behooves us to keep them clean,” he said with a smirk. At the respective ages of eight and seven, shortly after a drubbing Akeefa had given him, the two had become best friends. That particular dispute had involved a pastry. “I am so glad you have finally taken an interest in cleaning. Sabah was saying to me she needed someone to help her clean the cabins. I am certain she will be honored to have your assistance.” “I have no doubt that if you decide on it, I will find myself doing such work. But in truth that will not benefit us nearly as much as the integration of our retainers into this crew. The easiest way for me to affect this is to show the men that even I am not above doing what needs to be done. Man’s work. I cannot expect you to understand.” He jerked away as he said it, and her hand missed his nose. “A jest, dear sister, only a jest.” “Is it working?” Her interest was piqued and her tone became serious as her thoughts ran to another. “Of course. They are good men, and they realize our safety lies in unity of purpose and action. Mister Bailey knows his ship, and he is consistent and fair. Until we see action—and I hope we never do—we will not be brothers, but we will be able to function as a crew. How is the situation below? Seems to me I heard some raised voices.” Khalid leaned on the rail, avoiding her eyes. “It surprised me, is all. This is a smaller ship than we are accustomed to. I will manage. What do you think of our captain?” “Well, I hope to never cross swords with him. Never seen anyone move so fast, except maybe you.” Khalid gazed into his sister’s eyes. She involuntarily glanced toward the deck. “You have feelings for this man.” “Me? Well, I…” Akeefa fell silent. She was unwilling to lie to her beloved little brother. “Some.” He shook his head. “Some? I have never known anyone else to so consistently choose the more difficult path. Does father know?” “Is there anything father does not know?” “Probably not,” laughed Khalid. His smile faded and his gaze captured hers. “Beloved sister, you know I will support you always, but forgive me if I voice my reservations. Others often misunderstand the meaning of our actions.” “You mean like washing the gun carriages?” She forced her smile back in place. “Yes.” The resignation in his voice and his habitual sardonic expression betrayed his awareness that he had lost again. “Like washing the gun carriages. Speaking of which, I have wasted enough time and need to get back to work.” “Wasted…” she said, her voice rising. “Wrong word.” He backed away with a grin. “I needed a rest and am recharged by speaking with you. I will go back to work now and re-double my efforts.” “You had better,” she laughed. The Seahawk left Marseilles on the afternoon tide. With a good following wind, she spread her sail and left the coast behind. They marked her doing eight knots, and fully rigged, she was capable of nine or even ten. With a reasonable wind, few would be able to catch her. René had been serious with Akeefa about his teaching the men to fence. With only sixteen cannon, they were at a distinct disadvantage when it came to naval warfare. They had a slight speed advantage, but even that might be lost when fully loaded with Spanish steel. René stood on the afterdeck and addressed the crew. “I will make this short. I am René Dalembert, and I am the master of this ship.” There were grumbles from some of the men. Young captains were far from popular, and James had led the men to believe he was the one in charge. “I ain’t shippin’ under no boy,” yelled one of the seamen in the back. “S’il vous plait, come forward and voice your opinions, sir,” René said in a pleasant tone. A large, gruff man walked up to René. “I ain’t takin’ orders from no boy.” The men who had seen René aboard the Vrijheid took a step back in unison. “I see I must convince you otherwise.” The sailor outweighed René by at least sixty pounds, and from the scars on his face and arms, he was no stranger to fighting. “You gonna stab an unarmed fellow?” the man jeered. “I heard you were good with that pot-sticker, but you will sail this ship without a crew if you kill me. We ain’t that far from port.” “I own this vessel, and as captain you know I have the authority to kill you where you stand for your insubordination. You are, however, correct. I cannot run this ship alone. I need your willing help, or we might as well put back into port.” René eased his sword from its sheath and handed it to John Abel. “Mister Abel, I believe you held this for me once before. Would you be so kind as to take care of it for me again? I will reclaim it shortly.” “Yes, Captain.” The boatswain flashed a knowing smile. “Is that better, Monsieur…? Forgive me, I do not have all the names down yet,” said René. “Wade, Gavin Wade is the name you will soon regret addressing.” He took off his shirt. There were stripes on his back, and his muscles rippled across his shoulders. “Mister Abel, would you be so kind as to clear a space for our exercise?” “Move out of the way there,” John bellowed, and the men backed up, allowing a circle of space on the deck. The late afternoon sun painted long shadows across the deck. René centered himself. The men moved farther back, sensing the danger. “Do I need to insult you, sir, or can we begin?” René asked. Wade rushed René with both arms outstretched to grab him in a wrestling hold. René swiveled left and allowed him to rush by. Red in the face, the sailor bellowed and charged in again. René slid sideways, and again the man clutched air. “Stand still, ya coward. Do ya bloody mean to fight or don’t ya?” he yelled. René remained silent. Never allow your opponent to choose your tactics. Wade rushed him once more. This time René ducked under his outstretched arms. He flat-palmed a strike into the man’s kidney as he passed. Wade was panting, trying to gain his breath. Though in pain, he reached for René again. Grabbing the man’s arm, René used his momentum and pulled him forward and down. Wade crashed into the deck face first. He rose, bleeding and shaking. He growled like an animal and rushed René again. This time he changed direction at the last moment. As René spun away, Wade grabbed him in a bear hug from behind, his arms constricting with bone-crushing pressure. René stamped on the man’s instep. Wade eased up for a second. That was all René needed. Using only his arm strength, René broke the man’s grip and faced him. A strike to the other kidney and a flat palm strike upwards into the chin, and Gavin Wade’s eyes glazed as he dropped to the deck unconscious. René addressed the men. “This ship needs Monsieur Wade, and so I have done my best not to disable him. I am the captain of this ship, and I will not hesitate to defend that position. Do not underestimate me because of my youth. If I am truly threatened, I will do what I deem necessary. I do not expect you to simply accept my word, but in truth, you do not have the power to take this ship from me. If you choose not to sail under my colors, our next port is Malaga, and you may get off there. “Mister Abel, can we find a bucket of water to wake Monsieur Wade? I believe he may want to be in on this discussion.” The boatswain barked out an order, and one of the men fetched a bucket of water, which he emptied onto the sailor. Sputtering and shaking his head, Gavin Wade gradually returned to consciousness. He blinked rapidly in an attempt to refocus his vision. “Are you satisfied, sir, or do you still require proof I am in earnest?” René asked. “You are quicker’n spit. I believe I would rather wrestle a bear, but I like your spirit.” Wade tried to stand and failed. René extended his hand and helped Wade to his feet. “May I have my sword, Mister Abel?” “Yes, sir,” the boatswain replied. With the sword in René’s hand, not a man moved. “I will not defend my position again in this manner. You know our lives depend on our working together. The sea will not forgive us our
 disunity.” René addressed his crew while he held the sword casually, but in a manner that left no one unsure of its deadly potential. “I will not tolerate dissent. Are there others who have a problem serving under my command?” René paused long enough for the quiet to make its point clear. “There are nineteen men aboard this ship who have sailed with me as captain. I offered them the opportunity to debark at our first port of call. You will find they are all still aboard. At this point in our venture, I can guarantee you nothing but hard work. You are all men of the sea. When has it been otherwise? If we survive, you will be well rewarded, in both coin and experience. If we fail, perhaps we will meet somewhere warmer and discuss it.” A wave of laughter took the men as René turned to look at the boatswain. “S’il vous plaît, Mister Abel, relieve Mister Bailey at the whipstaff.” “Aye, aye, Captain.” The boatswain headed aft to relieve James. René nodded to James after he had walked over. “This is Mister Bailey, lieutenant aboard the Seahawk. You have made his acquaintance, and you will direct all of your communications to him. I believe you will find me a gentle and forgiving soul compared to Mister Bailey, and I release you into his capable hands.” James nodded in return, “Captain.” René joined Mister Abel at the whipstaff. He smiled to himself as James bellowed orders. CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX AFTER TRIMMING the hold, James managed to clear out a practice space barely large enough for René and Akeefa to spar, but it was sufficient. Akeefa had taught René how to access the emotions of others. The next step was how to manipulate those emotions. “Emotions are a double-edged sword,” she said as they moved through the ballet of a new riposte he was teaching her. “It is possible to be swamped in the same emotions you have helped intensify.” “Are they then not controllable?” “Yes they are, but it takes great effort and a good deal of strength,” she said. “That something is possible does not always mean ’tis appropriate to do it. I am certain your master taught you to conserve your strength and expend it with patience and precision.” René laughed. “Often. How do you know when to use this technique?” “The same way you know when to employ any technique. By trial and error, and when possible, following advice from one who has already experienced the outcome of using it.” Akeefa twirled, bringing her sword horizontally above her head to block and then slashed down to the right. Swords flashed as they moved smoothly from position to position, all the while commenting on the work. They came to a position of rest, going from movement to absolute stillness together, in perfect unison. Not a word spoken. René grinned, and she flashed back another of her heart stopping smiles. To be able to exercise one’s skill matched with another equally skilled was exhilarating. “How did you know I was thinking of the Maestro and that I had only beaten him once?” “I knew nothing of your past or your fears. Ordinarily I would have found out as much as I could about you before sparring. It was not possible to do that. My next option would have been the emotions most people display all the time and even say aloud. You did neither.” “Then why attempt to manipulate my emotions at all?” “Because I had never sparred with anyone even close to your skill, and for the first time in my life, I was afraid. Not of being hurt, I knew you were much too good for that, but of being thought less of because I am a woman.” A rosy flush crept across her creamy cheeks. “That is my weakness, my Achilles’ heel.” Do not rail at the pattern within which you find yourself. You are not there by chance, and if you allow anger to cloud your vision, you may miss the best opportunity for you to learn that which you are here to learn. “My master said that the thing which claims your attention the most is that which you should look at with the clearest eyes,” René studied Akeefa as she wiped down her blade and placed it within the case. “May I ask you what my master often asked me?” “Of course,” she said. “Where is your power?” “It resides within my heart.” “In what state is your power at its maximum?” “In stillness,” she said, without batting an eyelash. “Is anger ever still?” “No.” “My master rewarded me with pain whenever I would choose the weaker path of anger, toward myself or toward others. ‘Anger is for stupid amateurs,’ he would say, ‘and you are neither.’ Akeefa, do not pretend to yourself ’twill be easy; we are no longer children. Children change patterns as easily as they change clothes. The facility wanes as we get older. Still, you can learn and change and have already begun.” René smiled. “Do you have time for a cup of tea?” “Not at the moment. I have duties above deck. Perhaps you would like to get some air after I have finished?” “I would love to. It is a little cramped down here.” “’Tis a beautiful day indeed. When I have finished, we will spend time on deck,” René said as he escorted her to her cabin. He then made for the newly installed stairs. “Mister Merchant, stay lively up there.” James bellowed up at Andrew. “Keep those young eyes peeled.” Andrew was taking his watch in the crow’s nest. Young eyes were always best. “How is he doing up there?” René asked. “Ah, the lad is a natural—attention and balance. Kinda like someone else I know.” James let go a hearty laugh. “Glad to hear it. S’il vous plaît, report,” René said. “Cargo’s battened down and in trim. We’ve a full spread of sail and are making good speed. Found a couple of barrels of salt beef short-weighted, but not enough to make a difference. The gun crews are competent, and I believe we might stand our own in a fight.” René smiled at his lieutenant’s use of the word competent. René had been on his father’s ships, and he knew the gun crews of the Seahawk were a damn sight better than competent. James had put Farraj Haddad, one of the sheikh’s men, in charge of the cannon. The man’s expertise surpassed that of anyone aboard. Of the sixteen three-man crews, three were from the Moroccan contingent, and the competition had become fierce. “I need to shoot our position and make my log entries. Is there anything I should know?” “No, sir.” “Have you found quarters for the surgeon Al Zahrawi?” “I asked him, and he said he was most comfortable with the rest of the Musselmen.” “And are the men comfortable with him as a doctor?” James paused and cleared his throat. “Well, not so much at the start, but he is their man now. Men can tell a genuine leech from a fake, and Al Zahrawi’s a real doctor. Makes no difference that he ain’t Christian. We’re lucky to have him aboard. I remember old Doc Hopkins from the Albion. When he wasn’t tight, he was a right good doctor. When he was, you had to hope to all hell you didn’t get hurt. He’d as soon take your leg as look at ya. Not Al Zahrawi. He’d rather you kept your limb, and he don’t even drink. He’s got some crazy notions though. Don’t even believe in bleeding a man. We’ve a good crew, Captain, and a better ship. Is there anything you need, sir?” “Not at this time, Mister Bailey.” “Then I will be about my duties, sir.” James faced left and then made for the main mast. CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN RENÉ HAD shot the sun’s position and was in the sheikh’s cabin making his entries into the log. “We will be in sight of Malaga within ten days.” René finished his entries and closed the book with a satisfied sigh. “The men who attacked us in Marseilles knew nothing that proved to be of any worth,” the sheikh said. “Still, I have a theorem. Moulay al-Rashid has a younger brother who at best is impatient and at worst…well, I have heard rumors. He knows it has been my task to gather European support for al-Rashid.” “Will you be in greater danger in Morocco?” “No more so than here or anywhere else, I expect. After all, I have you and Akeefa. Hard to imagine anyone getting through you two.” “You give me more credit than I deserve, and I am only one man. Even with Akeefa, we are not invincible, and to think so would be folly.” The sheikh smiled. René sat back in his chair. “You do not indulge in folly, as far as I have seen, so I am certain there are more forces on the board.” The sheikh’s smile widened. “Come, my young friend. Did I not hear you promised Akeefa a walk on deck?” “I did and while we speak of folly, breaking a promise to Akeefa would perhaps add reckless to its definition.” When Akeefa stepped above deck, every eye tracked her movements as though magnetized. She wore a black burqa so only her eyes showed. Sabah, who kept her gaze fixed straight ahead, marched in front of her as if to intercept the thoughts and intentions of the sailors before they reached her charge. Making eight knots, the Seahawk glided over the swells, its cream-colored canvas snapping in the wind. René led the way up the stairs to the forecastle. Peering over the bow, he gestured. “It seems we have company.” His guests joined him at the rail. Akeefa clapped her hands and exclaimed in delight at the dolphins that raced along the bow wave, crossing back and forth in front of it as if the ship was motionless. “So graceful.” She leaned a bit over the rail pointing first at one and then another, fascinated by their play. “They are supposed to be good luck.” While she enjoyed the antics of the dolphins, René was captivated by her grace, the movement of her hands, and the joy in her voice. “Sail, ho!” Andrew yelled from high above in the crow’s nest. René’s gaze followed Andrew’s arm to the quadrant from which threat could come. He turned to Akeefa and her father. “It would be best if you went below decks.” She took a deep breath and, with her hand on her hip, stared at him. “For now. Just for now. I am sorry, but you do not know what to do and will only be in the way. If your sword is needed, I promise I will not be shy
 in inviting you to join the party.” René squinted in the direction indicated by Andrew. He could not see the ship yet. Thankfully, Andrew had keen eyes. “Come, Akeefa, We will do as René suggests.” The sheikh took her arm. “We will be called if we are needed?” “If it comes to that, you will know.” René kicked off his shoes and made for the mainmast. The crow’s nest was not a customary perch for a captain, but he needed to see the flags the ship was flying. The men gawked as he scampered up the rigging and in a blink he had joined Andrew. “Which direction, Mister Merchant?” “That way, sir.” Andrew pointed. René focused on a ship visible against the horizon. Fortunately, the setting sun gave a clear outline of the vessel. The flags… there was something about the flags. “Damn. ’Tis the Belle Poulé. Run up the Gilbert flag,” he called down to James. “Bring down the main sail, but keep her trim. Let her come alongside.” The ship he knew so well turned toward them. As it grew larger on the horizon, a feeling deep within expanded. Something was wrong. He asked Andrew for the ship’s glass to gain a better look. Squinting and closing one eye, he saw that the Belle Poulé wallowed. Something had happened to the sprightly vessel he remembered. He studied her. One-half of her yardarm was missing, and there were holes in the rigging. The Belle Poulé had been in a fight. Had she won or lost? He would not know until he spoke with her master. He prayed it would be Jacques, but his growing sense of dread argued against the hope for that outcome. “Andrew, keep your eye on that ship. Sing out if you see the gun ports opened or anything else that looks out of the ordinary. If we get into a fight, you stay up here. Do you understand?” “You don’t think I will be any help in a fight.” Andrew’s shoulders dropped and his gaze lowered to the planks of the crow’s nest. “I understand, sir.” “Non, you do not. I need you where your eyes and voice can help me the most. You know how to fire a weapon. Go down now and claim one with enough powder and shot. You will be able to see me clearly when I go across to the Belle Poulé. If you see me draw my sword, fire a signal shot so the crew will know we are in a fight. Can you do that?” “Yes, sir, I surely can,” Andrew called, already out of the crow’s nest and on his way down the mast. René looked at the Belle Poulé and a jolt of premonition surged through him. His awareness deepened fractionally. He climbed out of the lookout and went down the rigging only a hair slower than Andrew had. “James,” René called. James ran up to René “Yes, sir.” “Call the men to quarters, but quietly. Do not open the gun ports.” “I thought this ship was one of your father’s?” “’Tis, but something is wrong.” René continued to stare at the oncoming ship. “Do you know what it is?” “Non, and we may not until the last moment.” René paused, deep in thought. “Have John prepare to put twenty men into the longboats on the port side of the ship. We will keep starboard to them when they tie up. Tell him to take the boats around to their starboard and be ready to board her. If we need him, he will know it. Arm the rest of the men, but tell them to keep the arms under cover. I do not want to provoke a fight, but I will not have us caught with our powder wet, either.” “Aye, aye, Captain. And the Musselmen, sir?” “If we are joined in battle, it will not be with cannon, so have Khalid gather his men and remain aboard ship to protect his father and sister. I want you beside me. Remember, keep the arms out of sight until we know.” “Yes, sir.” James hurried aft to find John Abel. René made for the hatch to inform the sheikh and Akeefa of the ship’s contact. Before descending, he took one more look at the Belle Poulé. His expression changed from one of concern to one that entertained much darker thoughts. He fought against the grim truth his intuition brought him, against the pain and death he would visit on those responsible. He breathed evenly, initiating certain physiological responses that would prepare him for battle, and then went below deck. “I prefer you remain here until I can ascertain the situation with the Belle Poulé,” said René to the sheikh and Akeefa. “You sense something is amiss?” asked the sheikh. “Oui, I do.” “Then you will need our help.” Akeefa took a step forward. “If I do, you will know. I have detailed Khalid and his men to guard the hatch. Should it become necessary, you will be able to come above deck. S’il vous plaît, Akeefa, understand I am not posturing. Strategically it is our best course of action to keep you in reserve. Besides, I am not yet convinced there is a problem.” “Oh, yes, you are. You refuse to accept what you know, because you do not want it to be true. You had friends aboard that vessel?” she asked. “Oui, now will you do as I ask?” “Yes,” answered the sheikh for himself and his daughter. “Merci.” Like striding against an ebb tide, René went up on deck to meet his old ship. The Belle Poulé was much closer now, and it was obvious she had been in a serious battle. The damage was apparent, but more concerning was the way she moved. She wallowed through her tack. He had served aboard the Belle Poulé twice, and the crew he had trained with were not sailing this ship. The Seahawk could easily have shown the Belle Poulé her wake. Any other ship and he might have done just that, but not the Poulé. This was his ship. When it was finally within hailing distance, a voice he recognized called out. It belonged to Emile Lamert, first mate of the Belle Poulé, and he relaxed—a little. “Ahoy, the ship. We be the Belle Poulé out of Bordeaux,” Although Emile stood at the rail, hand to his mouth, none of the sailors that slouched around him were familiar. “Ahoy, the ship. We are the Seahawk out of Marseilles,” James bellowed. “Heave to and tie up.” The Belle Poulé was a galleon of the low-charged design. She had a relatively high aftcastle and a low forecastle, making her maneuverable but with plenty of space for cargo. With half of her yard gone and the sails and shrouds in distress, she was not going anywhere fast. The Belle Poulé slowly came alongside the Seahawk and presented her port side. The two ships came within boarding distance of each other, and coils of rope came across. “James, make fast the ropes, but tie ’em so we can get loose in a hurry if need be. I do not recognize anyone aboard that ship except Emile Lamert,” René said under his breath. The customary practice was for the captain of the smaller vessel to cross to the larger vessel in the absence of known rank aboard either. “Permission to come aboard, sir,” René called to Emile. Emile’s eyes widened in recognition, but the man gave no other sign. Another sailor moved closer to Emile and said something to him. “Permission granted, sir,” Emile replied, as if René was a stranger. The rope ladders thrown over the side of each ship made it easy for either crew to cross over to the other vessel. René jumped across with James right behind him. Both men were armed. “I am René Dalembert, and this is my lieutenant, James Bailey, of the ship Seahawk, recently out of Marseilles,” said René, as if meeting Emile for the first time. “Emile Lamert, acting captain of the Belle Poulé,” Emile’s voice was a growl, and he accented the word “acting.” Before he said anything more, the other sailor, a large man with broken teeth, cut in. “P’rhaps the captain would like to take tea in his cabin with this young gentleman captain.” He had a cutlass through the sash around his waist, as did all of the men except Emile, who was not armed. Emile’s left arm hung limp at his side. René sensed the battle raging within him. “We ran into some bad weather, and I have spent enough time below decks. Do you think we could have tea here out in the sunshine?” René asked Emile. Emile stood silent. “Of course. Let’s have tea out here in the sunshine.” The man with the broken teeth turned to a pirate standing behind René. “George, we will be taking a spot of tea out here on deck. P’rhaps you can find some crumpets to go with it.” He nodded to the man. René had been ready from the moment he stepped aboard. The man behind him was reaching forward with his cutlass to stab him through the back. René had already turned, however, and with one swipe took the man’s hand off at the wrist. The man screamed and clutched his stump. René plucked his cutlass out of the air and threw it to Emile. “Good afternoon, Emile. ’Tis nice to see you, sir,” he said, as he ran the screaming man through. “We thought you was dead, Master René.” Emile swiveled to face the large man with the bad teeth. There was an immediate report from the crow’s nest aboard the Seahawk as Andrew fired his weapon. The battle started. The pirate captain turned and fled aft, screaming at his men as he went. “Where is Jacques? Is he still alive?” asked René as he waded through the pirates. “He is locked up in the hold, along with the rest of the Poulé’s crew. Those Anton there has not killed,” Emile said through gritted teeth, as he cut through the throat of the man in front of him. René sensed the rage and frustration radiating from the big man in waves. “Can we get to him?” “We can try to free the crew, but Jacques has been wounded bad. We will not be moving him.” Emile engaged the next man. Men from the Seahawk poured over the sides, but they were badly outnumbered, and the pirates were also crossing to the Seahawk. A rude surprise awaited them when they reached the Seahawk’s hatchway. The Belle Poulé was a large ship, and if it was fully crewed,   the advantage would be almost two to one. René was glad of his crew’s fencing drills, for without them, two to one odds were fearsome, especially at sea where reinforcement was impossible and retreat improbable. He planned to reduce the odds a bit more. With that thought, René centered himself
 and began a deadly march through the pirate crew, disabling when he could, killing when there was no alternative. He intuitively swayed aside as a musket ball flew through the space he had occupied. He completed the movement by turning and throwing his knife. One of the pirates fell from the rigging, a blade jutting from his throat. “There,” Emile pointed to the hatch cover. He wheezed and bent over to get his breath. The pirates had worked him hard and treated him worse. Jacques Coudray’s life and the lives of his shipmates had been hostage to his good behavior. René released the pins holding down the hatch and then clutched the metal rings. “Emile, will you watch my back up here?” “Better than I did in Bordeaux,” Emile said with a determination that sounded like death. “It was not your fault, my friend. It was an idiot young man’s prank that was responsible, and if you think you could have watched me every minute of every day, you are wrong,” René rested his hand on Emile’s shoulder. “Just young stupidity. You cannot protect against that. Let us get through this, and we will sort it all out.” René threw back the hatch and started down the ladder. He jumped the last few rungs, making certain there were no surprises waiting for him. He knew this ship. The only place large enough to hold Jacques and the crew was in the forward hold. He moved quietly, his senses alert to anyone in his way. Four men guarded the hold door. René stood silent, collecting information. The guards were hardened sailors armed with cutlasses, and within this cramped space, the shorter sword gave them a small advantage. There would be no quarter given. With that thought, he threw his last knife into the eye of the man on the right and advanced toward the remaining three. He switched the sword into his left hand and struck down the man nearest him before he stepped back out of sword range. Now there were only two, their faces frozen in disbelief at the speed with which this boy had reduced their number by half. They rallied and attacked as one. René spun around the first pirate to reach him, stabbing him through the kidney as he went by. That left one pirate who, by the fear written across his face, knew he was dead. There would be no escape. René blocked the only exit. He aimed a wild slicing cut at René that would have taken his head clean off if it had connected. René was no longer in that space, though. And with a flick of his blade, the man fell to his knees, his life bubbling out through the hole in his throat. René pulled the pin from the latch and opened the hold door, stepping back as he did so. He yelled into the dark space. “I am René Gilbert, of Gilbert Ltd. I would speak with Jacques Coudray, captain of this vessel.” A raspy voice came out of the darkness. “What name did you go by when you worked in my hold?” René smiled at the memory. “You enjoyed calling me Worm, and I had the pleasure of serving aboard the best ship on the seven seas.” “Strike me a light, boys,” Jacques wheezed. “I believe this ship has reverted to her original owners. ’Tis about time, too.” René stood aside as the men came out, carrying Jacques. He was in a bad way. They all were. Jacques’s right arm ended in a blood-stained bandage at his wrist, and the rest of him looked like death. He had been a giant of a man, in spirit as well as physique. The man before René was shrunken and appeared much older, with watery eyes sunk deep into their sockets. If René had not recognized his voice, he would have doubted this was Jacques Coudray. “Will you be all right, Jacques? I have more work to do top side. I need a couple of you men to stay with the captain and the rest to come with me.” René took Jacques hand. “We will talk later, old friend. I am certain you have enough stories to keep me up all night.” “’Tis good to see you, son. We thought you were dead. ’Tis good to see you,” he said again, his breathing ragged. “I will be back as soon as I can.” René leaned down to retrieve the knife he had thrown. Then he was gone, up the ladder and back into the fight, followed by the original crew of the Belle Poulé. The fight still raged aboard the Poulé, but some of the pirates, including their captain, had crossed to the Seahawk. They wanted an undamaged ship, his. He spotted James. “James, finish cleaning up this ship and then come find me aboard the Seahawk. Did John and his men come aboard all right?” “Broke the back of the fight. I sent ’em back to the Seahawk. I will be following you when I have finished here. Go ahead, you still have work to do.” James turned to parry a sword thrust from one of the remaining pirates. René crossed to the Seahawk and then paused to take in the situation. He looked critically at the obvious difference in sword skill between the two crews. The grin on his face would never be taken for humor, but he was more than satisfied with his men’s skills. A large man pressed a group of pirates to attack the Musselmen who guarded the hatch. Dead bodies surrounded Khalid and his men. They, in return, had not suffered any casualties. He fought his way toward them, keeping his eye on them as he waded through the melee. A musket boomed. He turned in time to see one of the pirates at his back fall, clutching his chest. Up in the crow’s nest, Andrew was reloading his firearm as fast as possible. René’s grin returned. Perhaps this alone was responsible for the rapid clatter of weapons striking the deck. René knew full well it did not look like someone taking pleasure in an activity. It was more reminiscent of a mountain lion spreading its mouth to bare its fangs. Combined with implacable eyes and the elegant carnage behind him, his expression had made more than one man lose heart and surrender. René’s attention was now on Khalid, his group of men, and the pirates facing them. The hatch cover was open, and he was quite certain who waited on the other side of that hatch. The pirate captain loaded and primed his pistol and then brought it to bear on Khalid when a long knife, thrown from within the hatch, sprouted from the man’s right eye. René waded into the fray, joining Khalid and his men. This last group of pirates, exhorted on by their remaining leaders, refused to lay down their weapons. Blocking a vicious cut, Khalid deflected an attacker’s sword down and to the right. His own weapon was a blur coming back up across the man’s arm. It completed its lightning-swift arc by passing across the pirate’s neck. Blood exploded from the opened artery. The man’s eyes widened in surprise. Khalid completed the turn in time to see a pirate jab a six foot pike toward René’s back. Instinctively, he threw his scimitar. Glittering through the air, the sword competed with the pike’s trajectory and won. The weapon slammed into the man’s side with the smacking sound of a cleaver meeting a side of beef. Released from dead fingers, the iron pike clattered to the deck, followed by the pirate’s body. René faced Khalid, and for a moment out of time, the battle ceased. Both men nodded. True brotherhood is often exchanged without fanfare or words. “Merci,” René said. “My pleasure.” Khalid leaned down to retrieve a sword dropped by one of the fallen pirates. The awareness that the battle had been lost washed across the faces of the remaining pirates aboard the Seahawk. Clenched hands released weapons that clattered to the deck. “Khalid, will you inform your father and sister the battle is over.” said René. “Perhaps you might care to accompany me?” René laughed. “Do you anticipate a greater danger below than experienced up here?” “I do not see you moving toward the hatch,” said Khalid. “I do not have to. I am the captain. Take some of your men with you.” Khalid’s face wore its usual sardonic smile. “The risk will be the same. I do not have enough men.” René laughed and called out as he crossed the deck to John Abel, “I will see you later.” “Hopefully,” Khalid murmured and turned toward the hatch. “Are you wounded, Mister Abel?” asked René. “No, sir.” “Secure the pirate survivors in the hold and take the badly wounded among them to Doctor Zahrawi.” “Yes, sir.” René surveyed the Seahawk. His men had done well. There would be a butcher’s bill to pay, there always was, but the Seahawk had proved itself a fighting ship. As René entered the captain’s cabin aboard the Seahawk, he found Emile drinking a brandy while he inspected the colorful carpets and silks that now decorated the floor and walls. The doctor had reset Emile’s broken arm, which was bound and immobilized. Emile met his gaze. René knew the man well enough to hear the unspoken question and smiled at the thought of all the stories they would share. “In time, Emile. We will sort it out in good time. For now, are you up to taking command of the Belle Poulé? Jacques will not be fit for a while, if ever. Al Zahrawi is working on him, but the possibility exists he will lose the rest of the arm. Was he injured in the fight?” “No. We torched their ship, and they had nowhere to go. Like rats, there were too many of them. Jacques surrendered before they could slaughter us all. That damned pirate had his hand tied to the rail. He made us watch, with our hands tied and a dozen muskets trained on us. Said Jacques needed to be punished for destroying his ship. He lopped his hand off with a cutlass. Had to chop twice. Told me every time I said no he would take someone else’s hand. I been sayin’ yes ever since. I cannot tell you how much I appreciated bein’ able to say no today. To answer your first question, I am able to command the Poulé, but I do not deserve the post.” Emile studied the floor as if unable to meet René’s eye. “And why is that?” “I been lickin’ spit for the last two months. Always thought I had at least as much courage as the next man. Seems not.” “You must not mistake courage for stupidity. How many of your men still have
 two hands? You protected this crew in the only way open to you. We will have justice, and I believe you have the right to decide on it. For now, however, I need someone to take command of the Belle Poulé and see to her repairs. Will you take command, Mister Lamert?” “Aye, sir,” Emile said and stood to leave. “Emile, you are not at fault here.” “Will that be all, sir?” “Oui.” Emile closed the door behind him. The cabin’s lantern rocked easily on its gimbals throwing the flickering light against the scenic carpets on the walls. Four months. A mere blink of time. Four months ago René had ridden with Martin and Clarisse. And now he was the captain of the Seahawk and responsible for the wellbeing of every soul aboard the Poulé. Lives rested in his hands and his history of protecting others was filled with failure. He now understood the weight Emile labored beneath, but their roles had changed. Command by its nature is solitary. Fear must never be shared. Not by word, look, or deed. To do so is to release a contagion that can never be cured. Transfer its fire into anger against your enemies, but do not ask for solace from your allies. And Clarisse. He tried to avoid thoughts of her but that was impossible. He had sent disguised letters from Marseilles, but had no way of knowing if they had been received. She must think him dead by now. René opened the ship’s rutter and dipped the sharpened quill into the small bottle of ink. Thoughts of Clarisse and his father would bear inedible fruit whose only use would be to siphon his energy from the task at hand. He began to write. CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT “MAMAN, I allowed you to badger me into coming, but I refuse to participate in this ridiculous charade.” Although Clarisse forced herself to remain in her chair, she barely managed to keep her voice at a reasonable volume. “Clarisse, dear, it will not hurt you to meet some of these very eligible young men.” Her mother tapped the closed fan against her palm. Her mother’s lips were pinched tight as she too maintained an outward air of decorum in contrast to the raucous frivolities of the Twelfth Night festivities that filled the room. “The decorations are magnificent, are they not?” “Oui, Maman.” “You do realize how fortunate we are to have been invited to this particular soirée.” Her mother turned to face Clarisse. “The young men here are—” “Children.” “Clarisse! They are young scions who will mature. One day they will assume their fathers’ rank and wealth. The young man you pine for has been gone for almost four months. I am sorry, dear. I know you loved René.” “Love, Maman.” “If he were alive, would he not have gotten word to you?” Her words created an abyss filled with silence. And intense pain. Clarisse stood, every muscle taut with repressed anger. “René is alive. I cannot tell you how I know this to be true, but as I stand before you, he is alive and he will return to me.” Her father chose that moment to carry over three small plates of cake. “’Twas my good fortune to have been close by when they cut the Twelfth Night Cake. I forget they do so early in the evening so the children may partake. Perhaps one of us will find the bean inside and become the king or queen of this evening’s gaiety.” The smile dropped from his face as he handed Clarisse and his wife each a small gilded plate. Clarisse remained silent and so did her mother. The silence lengthened. “The decorations are magnificent, are they not?” her father said around a mouthful of frosting. “Oui, Edmond,” and “Oui, Papa,” were voiced simultaneously and with equal enthusiasm. Clarisse set her untouched cake on a small table. “Papa, I have a headache. May I retire from this evening’s merriment?” Casting a glance at her mother. “I fear the pain will only increase as the evening progresses.” “Of course, dear. I will notify Alfred to bring the carriage around.” “Merci.” He raised his hand to signal a passing servant when he caught sight of an old friend. “Arnaud,” he called out. “Clarisse, you remember Doctor Cloutier.” A distinguished looking middle-aged gentleman approached them, accompanied by a strikingly handsome younger man. Clarisse looked on the two with resignation and barely man-aged to relax the frustration on her wrinkled brow to an expression of social correctness. Regardless of its setting, this was to be a negotiation and Clarisse had learned from the best, her father. She sighed once, and then settled into the role of the dutiful daughter. Her father gripped his friend’s hand. “Ah, Arnaud, ’tis so good to see you. I did not know you were in Bordeaux.” “At the last minute, I was asked to replace Doctor Patin at a symposium here in Bordeaux. His health kept him in Paris. Unfortunately, the topic was Wren’s transfusion experiments, and although of dubious utility, I did my best to give a credible report. “But enough of that. I am pleased to see you under more auspicious circumstances. I am still saddened by the loss of those young men. Such a waste.” Involuntarily Clarisse’s facial muscles hardened and then relaxed as she fought to remain calm. Conversation paused. The doctor turned to Clarisse, his expression contrite. “I am so sorry, my dear. How rude of me to bring up recent sorrows, especially at a pleasant occasion such as this one. S’il vous plaît, forgive me.” “Not at all, doctor. I am grateful you accompanied my father to the duel.” “I am only sorry there was nothing I could do.” Clarisse remained still, willing the tears to remain unshed. “Merci.” Her father coughed and then said, “Arnaud, you remember my wife, Anne.” “How could I forget such a lovely woman?” The doctor bowed and then brushed her hand with his lips. “’Tis nice to see you again, Anne.” “The pleasure is mutual, Arnaud. But who have we here.” To Clarisse’s chagrin, her mother pointedly nodded at the young man standing beside the doctor. She then grasped Clarisse’s arm and artfully turned her to face him. “May I present my son, Nathan, a recently graduated physician who I am pleased to have join me at the symposium. Nathan, allow me to present my good friends Monsieur and Madame du Bourg and their daughter Clarisse.” “Monsieur, madam, mademoiselle,” Nathan bowed. “’Tis a pleasure to make your acquaintance. “S’il vous plaît, Papa, my headache,” Clarisse said under her breath. “Perhaps I might help. I suffer from occasional headaches and always carry some tincture of feverfew with me. I find it to be most efficacious.” Clarisse hesitated. Nathan held out his arm to Clarisse. “Moving away from stressful situations is also helpful.” She studied the tall physician. Dressed impeccably, he was clean shaven with brown hair tied in a queue at his nape. Clear brown eyes twinkled back at her. “Merci, monsieur.” Clarisse took his arm. “I believe a glass of wine might help as well.” “Madam, monsieur, Papa.” Nathan nodded to each and then guided Clarisse across the edge of the dance floor. He signaled a servant who brought them both a glass of wine. “I really do carry some tincture of feverfew.” Nathan reached into his coat. “Merci, but there is no need. You were correct. My headache has receded with the distance from its source.” “Powerful thing, distance. My father told me of the sorrow you recently experienced. I am sorry and will understand if you prefer to be alone.” “Merci, Doctor Cloutier, but I am fine.” “Nathan, s’il vous plaît.” Clarisse eyed the young man standing before her and saw only honest intent. “Nathan, tell me what excites you most about your profession.” “We live in a violent world. Healing others, or at least attempt-ing to heal others, gives me satisfaction that I cannot seem to find in any other endeavor.” “I know someone who felt—feels the same. You are fortunate to be able to exercise your satisfaction. Will you return to Paris after the symposium?” “Non, actually. I have been offered a position at La Maison Charité here in Bordeaux.” “Is that not the poor house? Of what use can you be there?” Clarisse regretted the insensitive challenge the moment she voiced it. “The poor get ill with the same pains and symptoms as those in this room.” Nathan dropped his gaze to the floor. “I apologize. Your statement was nearly identical to one I have been arguing with my father over these last few days. I think it touched a foul humor within.” “The apology is mine for such a thoughtless comment. I too must have echoed some left over anger from a previous conversation with my mother.” They both laughed. Clarisse’s laughter died. “The irony is that my statement is similar in its thoughtless assumption to a dear friend’s recent comment about war’s usefulness.” Nathan’s face was wrinkled as if he had just bitten into a lemon. “I fear I will be apologizing to you all night. My command of social speech rivals that of the unmitigated boor. I lack the patience to craft gentle speech. What I think just seems to come out. I am better with patients.” Clarisse cast a glance toward her mother only to find the two of them closely inspected. She sighed and then took his arm and guided him toward the far end of the salon. “Our conversation will go even better from across the room. Tell me more about La Maison Charité. Do they accept volunteers?” CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE FORTUNATELY, THE Poulé’s carpenter had survived. With both ship’s carpenters at work, the Belle Poulé’s yardarm, shrouds, and braces went up quickly. They put the Seahawk’s old sail to good use so the Belle Poulé could enjoy a full spread of canvas. The remaining pirates were locked in the forward hold. René had crossed to the Belle Poulé, awaiting word from Al Zahrawi about Jacques. “What is your cargo, Emile?” René’s gaze held fast on the hatch. “Well, ’twas mostly alcohol, wine and brandy.” “Was?” “There has been a continuous party goin’ on, and a good portion’s been drunk up or destroyed. I guess they had no need to be tradin’ it.” “What else
 have you got? I know my father, and he would not have filled this ship with just wine and brandy.” “No, sir, your father is a wise man. We got the usual: iron, trinkets, textiles, and some odds and ends. You never know what you will need in the way of trade goods. ’Tis always something small that seals the transaction.” “Emile, would you inventory what is left aboard? We need to work the Belle Poulé into our plans. How is your arm?” “’Twas not pleasant getting it set right. That damn Musselman had to break it again, but he assures me ’twill heal straight, and I will have almost full use of it. Good thing ’twas not my fighting arm. Still and all, I am glad it remains attached.” Emile’s voice softened. “Well, work’s not being done while I stand here. Will that be all, sir?” “Oui.” As Emile began to walk away, René called to him. “You see that someone else moves the cargo. You are the acting captain, and I want you healthy.” “Aye, sir,” he called back. René paced a few feet and then stopped. Ordinarily he was calm in a stressful situation, but he had never felt more helpless. He could do nothing but wait, and he had never been good at that. Finally, Al Zahrawi came up the ladder. The look on his face was one that doctors had learned to wear from the beginnings of their profession. The news was not good. “I am sorry, Captain, but there is nothing I can do for this man. The sickness in his arm has already gone too far. Taking the arm would not be enough. Perhaps the great Galen in ancient Rome would have known how to save this man’s life, but I do not.” Everything stopped. René had known, but he refused to accept a world without Jacques. “I am certain you have done everything possible, and there is no fault attached to you. Merci, sir.” He paused, trying to reorganize his chaotic thoughts. “Can you tell me how long he has left?” “Not long, sir.” René stared at the hatch as a flood of memories assaulted him. “With your permission, sir, I will continue tending to the rest of the men,” Al Zahrawi finally said. “S’il vous plaît, and merci for all your good work.” René addressed the doctor without seeing him. What he saw was a young boy who worshiped the captain of the Belle Poulé and who had to face him and admit to some misconduct or mistake he had made. There will be times when all your skill, all your training, and even all your love will not be enough for you to face what a moment has brought to you. There is a nameless force beyond this small world. To name it is to circumscribe it, and it has no boundaries. Still, it exists as you exist. I believe it is benevolent. Others do not. It matters not, but that it exists. Center yourself, and ask for support. Ask without expectation, without condition, and you may receive what you ask for. René put his hand on the hatch and paused. In that moment, he reached out and sensed a pattern of loving thoughts surround him. Akeefa. She could not help but respond to his need. Then a far greater energy enfolded them both. It was indescribable, as far above love as love was above the small emotions of anger and fear. The energy surrounded them both for an interminable moment and then released them with a gentle breeze of assurance. He had been about to sink into the abyss of guilt. In his heart he knew had he been aboard her, the Belle Poulé would have defeated the pirates. Without that one night of rebellious freedom, he would have been on this ship when the pirates attacked. He had not had a choice that night. The Maestro believed one’s destiny was not fixed, however, there must be moments within one’s story that were necessary to the integrity of a life’s plan. René knew in his heart that night was one of those moments. James had been overseeing the reconstruction of the Belle Poulé. He walked over to René. “Is there something I can do for you, sir?” René drew in a deep, calming breath. “There is. Would you locate Mister Lamert and ask him to join me in the captain’s cabin?” “Yes, sir.” René climbed down the ladder into the passageway and walked toward the captain’s cabin. His steward stood in front of the door as if guarding it. “May I see the captain?” “Yes, sir. He said to send you right in.” The steward opened the door. Jacques lay on the bed with his eyes closed, but René knew he was awake. Before the steward closed the door, René said, “When Mister Lamert gets here, send him right in.” “Yes, sir, straight away, sir.” The captain’s cabin was well appointed with fine mahogany furniture, including a large table and dresser. A gentle sea breeze came through the open window. The room was quiet with only the occasional thuds and shouts as the repair work continued. René sat on a chair next to the bed. Jacques would open his eyes when he was ready. René peered closely at his previous captain. He seemed so much smaller than the force of nature that memory served. René’s initiation into the crew of the Belle Poulé flickered though his mind. He had been eleven. The crew had tied him to the figurehead at the front of the ship. There had been a chop that day, and about every fourth swell, a wave had risen, drenching him with salt water. They left him there for a good part of the afternoon. In the early evening, Jacques had come forward to squint at René. “Hey, Worm, how you gonna serve my dinner—you bein’ otherwise occupied?” “I do not know, sir,” René said. “You agreed to take the job, and I am hungry.” “Perhaps we might get someone to take my place while I serve your dinner and then I could return,” René offered. Jacques laughed. “Perhaps we could, Worm, or I bein’ the captain could cut you down and call it a day.” “I would not want to get special treatment, sir.” “Not to worry son, you’re gettin’ plenty of treatment and ain’t none of it special,” Jacques said in that deep bass voice of his. Turning to the nearest sailor, he yelled, “Cut ’im down. If my dinner ain’t served on time, I will have you out there instead.” “Hello, Worm.” Jacques opened his eyes. “Hello, Jacques.” “Kind of casual, ain’t we, Worm?” Jacques tugged a smile onto his weathered face. “Sorry, Captain,” René was unable to think of a single thing to say. “Cat got your tongue, boy?” Jacques tried to sit. “Here, let me help you, sir.” René adjusted the pillows behind the captain’s back. “Are you in much pain?” “Nah, the Musselman gave me some laudanum. That stuff’s better’n brandy. Don’t hardly feel nothin’ at all.” He paused and studied René face. “I ain’t gonna make port this time, am I, son?” “Non, sir,” René said quietly. “Well, in all my days, my only real regret was my failure to protect a young man given into my charge, and now here he is sittin’ in front of me, full of life. ’Tis much better to leave out here on the ocean than rottin’ away in some tavern tellin’ lies. I will miss watching you, son, and that is a fact. I got more pure pleasure out of seeing you make your way than I can say. I used to tell your father I appreciated the loan of his son. He answered back that he expected interest on the loan. Does your father know you’re alive?” “I could not take a chance on writing him directly, but I wrote to Henri and to Clarisse, and if either one got through, then he will know. You are aware of my situation. I cannot return until I have the power to defeat the elder Gaspard.” Frustration filled René’s voice. “Looks to me you made a pretty good start. You got two good ships. Men have begun with a lot less. When you see your father, give ’im my regards, and apologize for me.” “Apologize for what?” “Well, I ain’t never lost a cargo before,” Jacques muttered. “Far as I can tell, you have not lost this one either. I know they drank some of the wine and brandy, but we still have plenty to trade with, and a ship to trade in. You did not lose anything, and I will tell my father so when I see him.” René reached for Jacques’ shoulder. The steward knocked on the door. “Enter,” said Jacques. The door opened, and Emile stepped inside, cap in his hand. “How you doin’, Cap’n?” “I have been better, Emile.” Jacques inspected his first mate. “René, would you mind stepping outside for a moment. I believe Monsieur Lamert and I need to talk for a bit.” “Not at all, sir.” René walked into the passageway and closed the door behind him. René heard Jacques speaking. He remembered the tone of voice, and it was almost like old times. René allowed the minutes to wash over him and then the door opened and Emile beckoned him inside. Emile was once again the old, sardonic sailor who had taught him most of what he knew about cargo and its storage. Jacques, however, had shrunk even further, having expended most of his remaining strength. “I relinquish the captaincy and this ship and request and advise you assign it to Mister Lamert,” Jacques said, in a barely understandable voice. “I reject your resignation, sir. You will remain the captain aboard this ship until either you leave it or it leaves you,” René said. “Mister Lamert will have the title and the ship in due course, but not yet.” “Gettin’ a bit of your own back, are ya, Worm?” asked Jacques. René smiled. “Something like that, sir.” Jacques took a deep breath. “’Tis been an honor and a pleasure serving with ya both.” He looked at René and his eyes widened, as if he were seeing something other than the man standing before him. Jacques smiled and then the smile faded. He tried to breathe, but only managed a weak cough. A trickle of blood ran from the corner of his mouth. He tried again and then with a certain amount of stubbornness, his eyes closed, and Jacques Coudray relinquished both his captaincy of the Belle Poulé and—of lesser importance to him—his sojourn upon this earth. René and Emile stood for a moment. Even the Belle Poulé settled quietly, and the sounds of repair ceased, as if the ship knew. “Au revoir, sir. It was an honor and a pleasure serving with you as well.” René turned
 to Emile. “Mister Lamert, are you prepared to captain this ship under my colors?” Emile straightened. “I am, sir. I accept the commission and the ship.” “Emile, I must ask. Have you dealt with your demons?” “The captain had a word or two with my demons, and I believe they will be of service to me now, and not the other way round.” He smiled his crooked smile. “Do you have specific orders, sir?” “Continue making your ship sea-worthy, and let me know when she is. We will have a service for Captain Coudray this afternoon at two bells into the dogwatch. S’il vous plaît, advise the crew. That will be all, sir.” René sat beside Jacques to spend time with his grief. “Thank you, sir.” Emile nodded toward Jacques and left René alone in the cabin. At the appointed time, the crews of both vessels assembled aboard the Belle Poulé, amidships. The setting sun glinted from a calm swell, the whitecaps sparkling against a background of dark green as the sea paid homage to one of its own. They had wrapped the body in sailcloth, with each of the men who had sailed under Jacques—including René—adding a stitch to seal it. Two six-pound cannon balls were sewn into the bottom of the shroud as well, to help Jacques on his way. The body rested feet first atop a wide oak plank placed through an opening in the starboard gunwale. The sea quieted, and the men followed suit. The duty and privilege of giving the eulogy belonged to Emile as captain of the Belle Poulé. René was content with this; he was not certain he could have spoken at that moment even if he wanted to. Emile wore his dress uniform, as did the other officers from both ships. The rest of the men wore whatever passed for their best clothes. “I had the honor…” Emile began, and then paused to take a breath, steadying himself. “I had the honor of sailin’ with Jacques Coudray for ten years. I never met a living soul with a clearer sense of integrity. If I were to list the things Captain Coudray accomplished in a single lifetime, we would still be standin’ here watching the sun rise tomorrow. I can hear Jacques’ voice in me ear though, saying, ‘Get on with it.’” Emile walked over and put his hand on the sailcloth shroud. “Jacques, I cannot let you go without saying merci. Merci for keeping me in the flesh on more than one occasion. Merci for teaching us all you could. To transfer everything you knew would have taken more than one lifetime. And merci for the good name of this ship in all the ports she has ever touched. You will be missed, Captain.” Emile nodded to the boatswain, who gave the command to the starboard gun crew. The even numbered cannon fired. The noise and smoke broke the silence, and time seemed to restart. René went over to the shroud and placed his hand on it. “I will add my merci, sir. May you have a safe journey, with the wind at your back.” Emile nodded to the honor guard standing beside the body. They lifted the board, allowing Jacques Coudray to leave the Belle Poulé for the last time. As the body entered the water, the sun began to set in earnest, and the sea turned a darker green. CHAPTER THIRTY A FULL week passed and the Belle Poulé was as ready as she would ever be. Still, the Seahawk would need to shorten her sail so the Poulé could keep up with her. The plan seemed prudent given that both ships were running with minimal crews. René and Emile leaned on the railing of the Belle Poulé’s aftcastle, watching the late afternoon sun finish its artwork for the day. “We will be travelin’ through the Balearics, and I intend to find an appropriate home for ’em there.” Emile smiled, an expression devoid of humor. There were thirty-eight pirates still alive, housed in the forward hold. In England or France, the authorities would have hung them. In Spain, where slavers ravaged the coast and able bodied seamen were scarce, they would be indentured into service. “Emile, you have the authority here, and ’tis your ship that demands justice. I will abide by your decision, but are there none among these men that could be put to better use?” “I would be happy to hang ’em all from the yardarm we replaced, but I will not foul this ship further. This group is as close to animals as makes no difference, and I will not be responsible for their preyin’ on anyone else.” Emile’s voice was a growl. “We will drop ’em off on a likely island. If their god wants ’em off, he will take ’em off, and if not, they will rot there.” They had obviously reached the end of this conversation. “We will take the ships into Malaga. Our intention is to trade for goods, mainly Spanish swords the new Sultan will pay well for. You do not have to abide by my wishes, of course. My father has not seconded them, and he is the one you work for. You know the situation. I offer you the choice of returning to Bordeaux or accompanying me.” Emile laughed. “I will not likely be desertin’ you now. We both know your father, and I have no doubt he’d approve your decision. Oh, he might not be so tickled at your destination, but he’d want you as strong as possible and that means with the Belle Poulé alongside. Speakin’ of which, you promised me the mysteries would be sorted out soon as we got the Poulé repaired.” “Oui. Come to the Seahawk for dinner tonight, and I will fill in as many blanks as I can. We will get the ships under way after that. How is the arm?” “Better every day. That Musselman doctor knows his stuff, and you are lucky to have ’im. We lost Doc Flaubert in the fight. He never was much of a fighter. We lost a lot of good men. ’Twill ease their memory a bit to drop off our unwelcome passengers and get this business done with.” “I will return to my ship then.” A rope ladder was thrown over the side. The rope ladder went down to where one could easily jump across to the same thrown over the Seahawk’s side. René climbed down and prepared to cross over to the Seahawk. “Until tonight.” When René entered the captain’s cabin aboard the Seahawk, he was transported to another world. Akeefa had taken responsibility for the evening’s dinner, which she would be attending. She had redecorated the cabin to reflect the sheikh’s status as well as her own. Not an inch of wall was without a fabulously colorful carpet or silken work of art. Precious metals and stones sparkled from some of the wall hangings. Several of them depicted stories or scenes where fantastic beasts competed for the eye with mundane trappings that could have been from any farm in France. The tablecloth was more muted, a cream-colored work of the finest linen, but it was no less impressive. The eating utensils were silver with intricately carved ivory handles. René found Emile in animated discussion with Khalid and the sheikh. “Welcome, my young partner.” The sheikh smiled broadly. “Come and join us. Monsieur Lamert has been regaling us with your youthful exploits.” “I was afraid of that. How am I to keep any respect if all my youthful mistakes are shared with my partner?” René laughed. “Mister Lamert, I am counting on your discretion.” “And you shall have it, sir, within the bounds of reasonable social discourse.” “Somehow I am not reassured, sir. I—” Akeefa entered the room and all conversation—and all René’s thoughts—stopped. Attired in a European-style gown of the palest blue silk, she glowed. The bodice of the gown was made of fine lace that rose up her neck. Sleeves of the same lace were caught at the wrists with ribbons of matching satin. By the European standards of the day, she was modestly covered, but the form-fitting gown left no doubt that this was a beautiful young woman. Breaking from the spell, René bowed to her and offered her his arm. She nodded and placed her hand on it. He escorted her over to Emile to introduce her, avoiding the sheikh’s and Khalid’s eyes. “You look beautiful,” he said. The words felt, and sounded, strangled. Akeefa smiled that smile at him. “Thank you, sir. You look quite dashing yourself.” Clearing his throat to make certain of his voice, he began the introductions. “Monsieur Lamert, may I present Akeefa bint Ammar Faruq Ghassan. Mademoiselle, I am pleased to introduce Monsieur Emile Lamert, captain of the Belle Poulé.” Emile bowed with his best French manners and held her hand. Having at least a general acquaintance with Moroccan culture, he did not kiss the young woman’s hand. That was just as well, for the atmosphere of disapproval in the room was already thick enough to cut with a rapier. “’Tis a pleasure to meet you, mademoiselle.” “The pleasure is mine, sir. I have heard all about your bravery and look forward to hearing about the fight to secure your vessel,” she said. Then she turned to the sheikh and bowed low to him. “Father, thank you for allowing me this evening. I understand the distress it must be causing you, and if you require it, I will repair to my room. These few moments have made me so happy that I will be content.” With those few words the tension in the room evaporated, and it was trusted friends enjoying a meal again. “My beloved daughter, we are among friends. For this once, I am disposed to put aside our customs in honor of the men who have seen us safely through our recent difficulties.” Akeefa turned to Khalid. “Beloved brother, are you also amenable to my being present in this fashion?” Khalid was nonplussed to be asked. Despite their paternalistic society, he was the youngest of the sheikh’s children, and the two were the closest of friends. He recovered quickly, put on a sardonic expression and raised one eyebrow. “My beloved sister, in whom the sun rises and sets, far be it from me to take affront when our esteemed father has not. As always, and however you wish it, I am your servant.” He executed a flamboyant bow. A moment later, Sabah entered the cabin carrying a tray of hot and cold salads. She refused to even so much as glance toward Akeefa. She left the food and returned with warm
 flat bread, which served Moroccan culture as both staple and utensil. Mister Downs, the Seahawk’s cook, was not in evidence, and René wondered at his absence. The dinner was lengthy and exquisite. A cuisine experience, each new dish competed with and complemented the previous one. As Sabah brought in the courses, René’s amazement increased at the variety of foods aboard that he knew nothing about. In truth, he had not paid that much attention to the mix of victuals. “Did you bring all of this food aboard with you, or did you somehow convince James to load it on?” asked René. The sheikh smiled. “Well, there are limits to those comforts which I am prepared to surrender, and decent food is one of them. You have been too busy to notice, but you have eaten better than would be expected aboard ship, although not with the variety we enjoyed tonight. Given our recent victory, I felt tonight’s meal should be a bit more celebratory. “I agree,” said René. “Who prepared the food?” “Well, I think Mister Downs and Sabah have come to an accommodation,” said Akeefa. “Given there is only one galley aboard this ship, they were forced to accept a truce.” “I thought Mister Downs had been injured in the fight,” said René. There was a brief silence. “Oh, I am certain the man was injured in the line of duty,” Emile said, graciously filling the empty space. “He’s none the worse for it, and the food is excellent.” “Monsieur Lamert—” Akeefa began. “Emile, s’il vous plait, mademoiselle,” he interrupted. “Emile,” she corrected herself. “What is to be done with the remaining pirate crew?” Apparently this was not a question Emile expected from a young woman, and he paused, clearing his throat. Not knowing what to say, he looked to René for assistance. “You may answer her, Emile. Akeefa is quite able to withstand the knowledge.” “I intend to toss ’em out on the first suitable atoll we come upon once we reach the Balearic Islands.” All pretense to polite conversation drained away. “That seems like a lenient punishment to me,” the sheikh said. “’Tis not my intention the island be life-sustaining,” Emile said. “No fresh water.” “Ah,” said the sheikh. “I expect the island to be free of its human garbage within short order,” Emile said, without emotion. “Monsieur Lamert, I am confident you will find no difficulty understanding the culture I come from. Now I believe a cup of coffee would be appreciated.” The sheikh leaned back in his chair. As if by magic, Sabah and Mister Downs entered the cabin. The cook carried a tray of small cakes, and Sabah bore the ever-present pot of strong, sweet coffee. There was also brandy for Mister Lamert. Downs had a large bruise on the side of his face that was strangely similar to the shape of the coffee pot. “Merci, Mister Downs, the meal was excellent,” René said, acknowledging him as the cook of the Seahawk. “My pleasure, sir.” Mister Downs covertly glanced at Sabah. “Madame Sabah and I decided, ah… she would serve, and I would mind the food. I am glad you enjoyed the meal.” Sabah could have been cast from stone for all the reaction he received. “I must say I was ably aided by my assistant, Madame Sabah.” Downs moved so that René’s chair was between himself and the woman. There was a slight rise in temperature at the word ‘assistant.’ Akeefa made a small head movement and the atmosphere calmed. In order to prevent another, possibly deadly, encounter between Mister Downs and Sabah, René added, “Sabah, I am certain some of these dishes must have originated with you, and the food was excellent. I appreciate your contribution. We have all thoroughly enjoyed this meal.” Sabah came from a long line of women used to disguising their emotions, but René sensed her satisfaction. He also noted the smile Akeefa sent his way. “Thank you, sir.” Sabah turned to the sheikh and bowed deeply. “Will there be anything else, Abu?” “No, thank you. The dinner was well prepared.” Her eyes widened as the compliment registered. The sheikh used compliments sparingly with his family. There would be no battles going on within the galley—if only for tonight. One problem at a time. “I believe you gentlemen will want to move on to a discussion of trade and other subjects to which I will not be able to add measurably, and so I will thank you again, beloved Baba, and you, my brother, for this memorable evening.” Akeefa rose gracefully and walked over to her father, gave him a kiss on the cheek, and then followed Mister Downs and Sabah out of the cabin. Emile asked permission to light a cigar, and the men got down to the task of planning a coordinated trading venture using both ships instead of the one. “We should keep whatever alcohol that remains on board the Belle Poulé for trade once we reach Morocco,” the sheikh said before sipping his coffee. As the sheikh turned to Emile, the diamonds and rubies set into his tunic reflected the candlelight. René smiled to himself at the lengths a father will go to please a daughter. Sheikh Ghassan’s customary dress was more utilitarian. A truly powerful man has no need for you to be aware of that fact. The Maestro’s voice was clear in René’s mind. “I thought your religion did not permit drinkin’,” Emile said. “The fact the Koran forbids the use of alcohol does not cause its use to disappear. Do the injunctions and prohibitions of your religion meet their intentions?” Emile laughed. “Not by a long shot.” He coughed, choking on a sip of brandy. The sheikh smiled. “We will be smuggling, but in truth even the Sultan al-Rashid has been known to imbibe now and again. Perhaps more ‘again’ than not. The wine and brandy will lubricate our business dealings, and is it not true that often the success of a large business transaction depends on the smallest details for its completion?” “I know we are supporting the new sultan, who you say will be more amenable to reason than his predecessor, but I am still uneasy about supplying weapons. What guarantee do we have these weapons will not be used against Europeans?” asked René. “None,” replied the sheikh. “I have never found a guarantee at either end of a sword. By Moroccan standards, however, al-Rashid is a more reasonable and moderate man than either his father or the majority of his siblings. At the moment, I, and others like me, have considerable influence with him. He knows that in order to enlarge his holdings and take his place as a modern ruler, he will have to have alliances with the west. That will mean curbing the Barbary corsairs and the white slave trade. It sounds contrary to reason to bring weapons to your enemy, but if your enemy is willing to accomplish your goals, it behooves you to assist him by helping him to remain in power. Do you believe I am using you for my own ends?” “Non,” replied René, who needed to stand and walk. “If the players on the board obey the rules of the game and continue to play, I am confident of our conclusions. That we must protect al-Rashid in order to help create a more moderate state is true. In all selfishness, I need a powerful patron if I am to best François Gaspard and have any hope of returning to France. Still, I am unsettled.” He paused. A vague sense of uneasiness wove through him. But nothing more specific than that made itself known. Once you have decided, put away conflicting thoughts, keeping them against the time when you may have to recalculate your conclusions. Until then they only weaken you. Do not entertain them. “I cannot find fault with our plan, nor does a better alternative present itself to me. Therefore, we will continue with an enlarged version of our original plan,” René said. They discussed the expanded details of the venture until all were clear with their respective parts. “I believe I will take a turn on deck to check on those who were injured.” René nodded to Emile and then turned to Sheikh Ghassan. “With your leave, sir.” “Please do, sir. I shall remain and listen to a few more of Monsieur Lamert’s tales. My credulity has been assaulted, but is not yet overthrown.” Emile raised his eyes in mock surprise. “Are you implying, sir, that I have employed some exaggeration in my accounts?” “I am certain I never used the word ‘some.’” René laughed and closed the door. He was confident the good- natured banter would continue late into the night. He was glad it was not his cabin, however, as it had been a long day, and he was tired. Still, he needed to check on his men first. CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE “LAND HO,” Andrew called out from the crow’s nest. “Starboard, twenty degrees.” “S’il vous plaît, Mister Abel, signal the Belle Poulé we are changing course.” René raised the spyglass to his eye. “Shorten sail, sir.” “Aye, aye, Captain.” The boatswain turned and yelled orders to the sailors in the rigging. “James, have the men take soundings as far in front of us as possible. Charts say it gets shallow in these waters, and it shifts.” “Five fathoms,” the sailor on the starboard lead line called out. The Seahawk could make do with fewer than two fathoms, but the Belle Poulé, being larger, needed more depth or risked grounding. “Four fathoms five,” called the sailor on the port side. The small bit of land in front of them was about a half-mile in diameter. It was mostly sand, with some sparse vegetation. There was no sign of a fresh water source, and René’s charts made no mention of it. “Drop anchor at three fathoms, sir,” René ordered. Three fathoms was sufficient for the Belle Poulé. René had qualms about this, but it was better than having the thirty-eight men hanging from the yardarm like curing pheasant. The Belle Poulé came to rest fifty yards from the Seahawk. “Mister Abel, signal Mister Lamert to come aboard,” René said. “Aye, aye, Captain.” “Emile, you know I am not squeamish, but there are thirty-eight men here. Is there no other alternative?” René paced his small cabin. “These scum’ll have a larger chance
 than all of the innocents they sent to the bottom of the sea. Could be more of the same’ll come by and pick ’em up. How appropriate, them bein’ made slaves by the Sallee Rovers? That’d be pirates enslavin’ pirates. You know what’ll happen if we turn ’em over to the Spanish authorities.” “They will be auctioned off to whatever trading company offers the most silver.” “And we will end up facin’ ’em again.” Emile came to attention and addressed René. “Is that to be your orders, sir?” “I said you would be responsible for seeing justice meted out to these men, and I hold to what I say. I wanted one last chance to come up with something that does not bloody our hands.” How much blood can my soul withstand? “We live and die in difficult times. I believe Jacques would’ve been about followin’ the same course of action, and if you think for a second, you will know ’tis but the truth.” Emile’s voice was quiet. “He would have tossed ’em all overboard and saved himself the trouble.” “He would have, at that.” Emile barked a quick laugh. “Your orders, sir?” “Drop them off with a jug of water per man, and toss them a half dozen knives once the last man is ashore.” René gave the order. Responsibility for his ships was his to accept. “Aye, aye, Captain,” said Emile as he clambered down into the ship’s boat tied up to the Seahawk. Four sailors took up their oars and rowed him back to the Belle Poulé. Longboats ferried the pirates out to the atoll. The men were dropped in the shallows, their hands tied. Each one had a jug of water about his neck. The last man ashore had an additional gift, a sack holding a half dozen knives. As he reached the shore, the other men converged on him like blow flies on a dead squirrel. “Get us out of here, Mister Abel,” commanded René. “Make sail, Mister Wade,” yelled the boatswain. “Aye, aye, sir,” Gavin Wade replied. He and the other men hoisted the main sail. As if even the ship wanted to be away from this place, the Seahawk showed her wake the moment her sails went up. In no time, the atoll had faded from sight, and they were back into the deeper blue waters of the Mediterranean. René passed the watch to James and retired to his cabin. René sat at his desk trying to meditate. This night his thoughts would not be tamed. There was a knock on the door. “Enter.” The door opened, and Akeefa stood there. She was dressed in the loose-fitting garment worn by Arab women including a hijab that covered her hair. Out of deference to her father and brother, she wore traditional garb outside her cabin. “May I come in?” she asked. “I do not mean to intrude, but I sensed your distress.” René jumped to his feet and pulled the chair out for her. “S’il vous plaît, come in. Is Sabah with you?” he asked, looking out into the passageway. “No.” She closed the door and then sat in the proffered chair. “I felt we could speak more easily without her continuous disapproval to muddy the air.” Akeefa removed the hijab. “Are you uncomfortable with me being here alone?” “I would not like to duel your father or brother should you be found in here with me.” “Do not worry, I will protect you.” She cast a smile at him. His heart beat faster. When Akeefa smiled, the world changed. It was as simple as that. “Well, then I will put my worrying aside. What would you like to talk about?” “Are the pirates no longer aboard?” “Non, and in truth most will be dead by the end of the day.” He shook his head. The stronger would have already killed the weaker for their water. There would be fewer alive by tomorrow, and fewer still the day after. “That is the reason for your sadness?” She held eye contact with him. He sat on the bed, and then stood. The need to move overpowered him. The cabin was so small there was not enough space to wander around without bumping into her. “I am merely feeling sorry for myself. I have no doubts these pirates merited such justice, but I am frustrated and saddened the responsibility for their deaths should have to rest with me.” “Are we not responsible for our own lives, within the destiny given to each of us?” “I believe we are.” “Then where does the responsibility lie?” “With the decisions made by each man,” he responded automatically. “And what then is your responsibility?” she pushed. “To protect those I love.” He dropped down again. “And have you done that?” René was silent for a moment, thinking of Martin. When he answered, he spoke as if each word spilled into a still pool. “I have not always succeeded, but in each instance, I believe I have tried to do so to the best of my ability.” The atmosphere in the cabin was thoughtful, but it began to heat. The tension rose a hundredfold. René again stood in an attempt to pace. Blocked, he turned to her. “Would you like to spar? I could do with some exercise.” He cleared his throat. “I would love to, but I thought the hold was taken up by the injured.” “One has died, but the rest have recovered to the point where they can be taken back above deck. I will meet you in the hold in an hour.” René moved aside to allow her to pass. Akeefa replaced her hijab. Her eyes sparkled with excitement. “In an hour.” René sucked in a deep breath and then let it out as he dropped onto the bed. The hold took the better part of that hour to be cleaned of the remaining infirmary waste, used linens, and makeshift cots. Fortunately, Doctor Zahrawi demanded an immaculate workspace and lectured the crew to improve both their hygiene and the cleanliness of the ship. With the men moved, only the pungent smell of lye remained. René loosened up and awaited Akeefa. She came into the hold wearing her traditional attire. Once she assured herself they were alone, she removed her outerwear to reveal the clothing she wore while sparring— shiny black silk pantaloons with a white silk blouse. She had braided her deep black hair securely atop her head. Without being obvious, he hoped, he looked at her closely. Had she bound her breasts? Having seen her in European garb, he knew she was much more buxom than he had previously thought. He supposed it had something to do with the economy of movement critical to fencing at their level. He allowed her time to warm up, watching as she gracefully moved through her exercises. “En garde,” Akeefa called out to him, and they began their deadly dance. The rapiers they had chosen came together with a rasp. Akeefa was a master of most edged weapons but she clearly enjoyed practicing with those she rarely used. In their sparring together, they had worked through many different types of swords. Feint, high block. The swords sang through the air. Despite their adeptness, neither René nor Akeefa had yet managed to disarm the other. As they continued to spar, perspiration made Akeefa’s blouse stick to her body. It became more transparent as the moments passed. “You seem distant,” she said as she slid round a thrust and took a wicked swipe at his head. He blocked. “Are you attempting a new type of centering technique?” René was doing his best to center himself. He had never felt this way before. Rather than serving him, his internal focus was growing more disorganized by the minute. He blocked a cut to his leg and followed through toward her torso. The swords came together with a loud snick. Hers circled his with a familiar rasping, and in the next instant, he found himself standing there empty-handed. Motion stopped. They were both shocked. He looked at his sword lying on the deck and stepped back, shaking his head in disbelief. Your inner self is a horse that is never broken. Do not ever think it has been; it will surprise you at the most inopportune moment. By the same token, however, do not fear it, for it is this untamed vital flow that powers your sword and your life. The Maestro had delivered this advice whilst taking a vicious cut at René’s neck. It is guaranteed to surprise you when you have the hubris to think nothing can. Akeefa leaned down, retrieved his sword, and held it out to him. Her expression changed as if she were preparing a sarcastic comment. Then she looked into his eyes and came to rest, still holding the sword. “René, are you hurt?” “Non, I was remembering. There are things we must speak of, for I have encountered a weakness I do not think we can afford.” He took her arm, leading her to a bench on the side of their space. “I am struggling with the remaining shreds of honor I possess, after having run from my home and those I love.” “But René—” “I know,” he interrupted her. “All of the reasons for my continued flight are valid, and ’twould be useless to throw my life away for no gain. I know all of this in my head, but my heart, Akeefa, cannot agree. I left behind a young woman who my soul recognized. I would not for my life betray her, but evidently, my heart is capable of recognizing more than one soul, and I am at a loss.” She shook her head. “I do not understand.” “Oui, you do, my dear friend, for you can see my heart as your own. And if I have no control of my heart, it appears my body will join the rebellion as well.” René’s hot face reflected his embarrassment as he fought the chaos within. “What would you have me do?” “Try not to kill me when we spar,” he said, with a poor attempt at a laugh. “As if I could ever do so. That, however, was not what I meant. You once told me that only in complete trust and honesty would we remain alive. I believe you were correct then, and only truth will save us now. I am also attracted to you. I do not know what love is, so I am unable to name what I feel. I know it empowers me at times, and at other times, it completely weakens me. I have yet to be able to control it, or even know which emotion it will bring. And yet, I trust you, and I trust our destiny. Somehow, I know that trying to force our destinies together or apart would be disastrous. For now it will have to be enough that we both know. We could not long
 hide our emotions from the other anyway. When you become distracted, if I must, I will help you focus your attention. You must do the same. Fortunately, we have a fine doctor aboard.” René glanced at her to see if she was smiling. A momentary jolt shot through him that she was not. They paused and then both smiled at the same time. “Shall we begin again?” he asked as they stood and returned to their places. “I will do my best to hang on to my sword this time.” “You better,” she said, and attacked. CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO Château Gaspard, Bordeaux, France THE HOUR crossed midnight when the horses approached Château Gaspard. The noise caused Horemheb to glance out through the bolt holes that had been enlarged to create windows beside Victor’s bed. Although firmly in control of Victor’s body, even the slight movement that allowed him to see through the window brought excruciating pain. The torch light from the battlements reflected scarlet from burnished armor. Tied to his saddle, a man weaved back and forth, his struggle to remain upright a last effort to maintain what small hope survived. As they approached the bridge, his armored escorts pulled him from the saddle. One of the men banged his steel gauntlet against the château’s massive wooden door. He was answered from above by no fewer than a dozen muskets aimed at his heart. “Who goes there?” “Auguste Curie, on the business of the Comte,” said the armored man. After a short wait, the door opened. The men entered, dragging their charge with them. Horemheb summoned his servants. The majordomo was sure to lead the men to the Comte’s library. And he intended to be present. The rapid movement through the hallways caused Horemheb a great deal of pain, but his bearers managed to carry him to François Gaspard’s library in time to intercept the guards and their prisoner. The majordomo rapped his knuckles against the thick wood. “Oui,” said François Gaspard. “The men you were waiting for, sir, and your son.” “Enter.” Horemheb motioned to his bearers to move him to the corner of the room away from the Comte’s desk. His gaze met that of Victor’s father, but he remained silent. The fire roared in the huge hearth, its heart beating chaotic patterns on the furnishings and books, bathing the room and its occupants with moving shadows. The guards escorted their prisoner, who was barely able to remain on his feet, into the room. No one spoke. “It has come to my attention that the boy you were paid to remove a second time is still alive and healthy.” Victor’s father drummed his fingertips on the desktop. “I was assured the boy had drowned,” rasped the mercenary. He sounded as if he had difficulty breathing. “The captain accepted payment.” “I am aware of that, and the captain will be dealt with appropriately. Still, we are left with the fact you have failed. A second time.” “The boy is unusually skilled,” the man pleaded. “I thought that was understood when the first two mercenaries were unable to kill him.” “That is unfortunate for you, is it not?” Gaspard sipped his wine, appearing to savor the moment, and then turned to the larger of the armed men. “Drown him in the moat and then return. I will need you to carry a message to Paris. ’Tis a pity there are no sharks in that ditch.” The prisoner struggled as the two armored men dragged him from the room. “Father.” Horemheb hated that Victor’s damaged voice sounded like a stiff bristled brush scraped against a sandy floor, interrupted by higher pitched sounds he could not control. His vocal cords might never recover from the damage sustained from Victor’s screams. The elder Gaspard remained silent, obviously aware that something between him and his son had changed. “Forgive the interruption, but since we are discussing my adversary, I feel it necessary to speak.” One of the armored men averted his eyes from the bloated abomination on the stretcher. “Look at me,” Horemheb commanded. The temperature dropped as if a door had opened and death had entered. “Your eyes belong to me, and if they are not used for my purposes, I will have them.” The huge man redirected his gaze. “Forgive me again, Father. I have no right to usurp your authority. I have a certain amount of,” he paused, “frustration tied up within this issue. I believe you were about to have this man killed. Am I correct?” “You are,” said the elder Gaspard, the beginnings of a smile appeared on his face. “What would you have me do with him?” “I would like the opportunity to question him. After all, if not for him, I would at least experience the comfort of knowing my adversary was dead.” He turned to the man in chains. “I must now take comfort where I may.” Without the mercenaries holding him on each side, the prisoner would have collapsed to the floor. The light in the room seemed to dim. “Take him to the dungeon and see that he remains alive until my son can question him.” The Comte’s retainers dragged the prisoner from the room and closed the door. “We will have to devise an easier, more comfortable way for you to move about the château,” said Gaspard. “Merci, Father.” “I have arranged for the king to sign a Lettre de Cachet naming young Gilbert traitor.” The elder Gaspard poured himself another glass of wine. “Would you like some wine?” “Non, continue.” A less than subtle role reversal had taken place. The very air snapped with a power and focus of intent that appeared to make François Gaspard uncomfortable. Accustomed to creating discomfort, it was clear he struggled with its effect. “I doubt the king’s agents can apprehend him, but it will give us legitimacy should he return. The cost to buy a Lettre de Cachet these days is outrageous,” he said, with an attempt at humor. “The crown will never apprehend him.” Horemheb paused, deep in thought. “We must take further steps to ensure he returns.” “How can that be accomplished? My resources are seeking word of him, but as of yet, we only know where he has been.” One of the servants holding the stretcher moved slightly, to ease the strain on his arms. Horemheb groaned with the movement. “Remain still.” The servant froze, his face blanched white. “He will soon be on the African continent.” “How do you know that?” “I have certain resources in the area. We need to ensure he returns to Bordeaux.” François swirled his wineglass before the candle. The red liquid lapped against the crystal. “And how may we do that?” “There have been sporadic outbreaks of plague in the countries around us, most notably in London last year. I suggest we assist its visit to Bordeaux.” Victor attempted to smile, but due to the pervasive scar tissue, it served only to highlight the gruesome caricature that was his face. “The plague!” François exclaimed, naked fear written across his face. “You jest.” “I do not.” “How will we prevent it from striking us?” “We cannot. You and mother will have to leave for a time.” Unnerved, the elder Gaspard was unprepared for the role reversal and responded as if to a superior. “How long?” “Until the plague has worked its way through Bordeaux. Perhaps a year.” “You risk much. How can you be certain he will return?” “Those he loves are here. He will return.” Horemheb ended the discussion with a gesture to his servants. “Take me to the dungeon where I may visit with our inadequate assassin.” Even the horrendously damaged body he was forced to wear failed to overshadow the satisfaction Horemheb took in the exercise of power. For the first time in three thousand years, the exhilaration of command surged through his emaciated form. Destiny was now his to control. CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE Malaga, Spain THE SHEIKH and René stood at the rail admiring the fortifications visible from Malaga’s harbor. The mighty La Alcazaba’s triple walls soared upwards in the distance. Built in the eighth century, the massive fortress looked as if it had grown from the bedrock itself. “Impressive, is it not?” the sheikh asked. “They say there is even a Roman amphitheater within, as well as extensive gardens.” “Fortunately, we will not have to storm it.” The sheikh stared at the edifice for an instant longer. “I have sent a letter of introduction to the Gilbert Ltd. factor within the city who will help sell our cargo. On your advice, we will keep the remaining brandy and wine aboard the Poulé.” The sheikh nodded his agreement. “Where will I meet Abdul Karim to facilitate the transfer of the weapons?” “My friend Miguel Zaportas has a villa up the coast. I have arranged for you to stay with him. He comes from a family of wealthy Jews who were forced to convert to Catholicism.” “Why do you smile?” asked René. “I cannot think being forced to worship someone else’s God would be humorous.” “I smile at the memory of my old friend. The Zaportas have never worshiped any God but the Jewish God. They have maintained two faces and have returned to Spain to protect the few remaining Jews here who secretly remain Jews. My family and theirs have been close for many years. I think you will never meet a more honorable man than Miguel Zaportas. He will be a good man for you to know. Abdul Karim will join you there. Ah, here comes the harbormaster. If you will excuse me, I will retire. Do you have the requisite silver he will need to forgo inspecting the ships?” René glanced at the sheikh and was about to say something, but refrained. He nodded. The sheikh paused. “I must apologize, sir. I know that having grown up in a trading company, you have some experience in this area. Please do not take my previous comment as an insult. That was not my intention. You must forgive an old man who is unaccustomed to sharing responsibility.” Sheikh Ghassan, like his daughter, was a man of rare empathic power. René did not believe it was possible to lie to this man. “I am honored to have you as a tutor, sir, and will endeavor not to act the callow youth.” The sheikh laughed. “As if you could.”
 René watched the man walk toward the hatch. “Destiny,” he said quietly. He brought himself back to the present as the harbormaster’s longboat gently bumped against the Seahawk. As the man came aboard his ship, René’s eyes widened at the greed written on the factor’s face. Avarice animated his every gaze as he cataloged and estimated the baksheesh he expected to exact in order to allow the ship to dock. This would be less expensive than he had prepared for. His father had always told him the greedier the man, the less he will be satisfied with. Later that afternoon, with both ships tied to the quay, René and James disembarked and made their way through the La Puerta de Atarazanas gate into the square at the center of town. They proceeded to the suburbs, the interior district of the wall, where the taverns and mercantile stalls were found. “Do you think we could be about sampling what the locals drink? Might be we’d find somethin’ worth trading.” James licked his lips. “Awful hot today.” René laughed. “’Tis winter, James.” “Still, pretty warm in these southern climes, and anyway, I thought we was collecting information like usual.” “Are you certain you would not rather see the inside of La Alcazaba? There is a Roman amphitheater, you know,” René said with a straight face. “Ah, well, is it something to do with our trading?” “Non, just sightseeing. We should head to a tavern and get a feel for what’s going on.” René fought to keep a straight face. “You were jokin’ with me all the time.” “Well, I would be interested in seeing the place, but I expect it can wait a bit.” They stopped in front of a likely tavern with a stylized woodcarving of a dove out front. The name La Paloma Blanca was easily understandable. James spoke no Spanish, but René was confident he could make himself understood. The tavern had tables out front, but in the heat of the afternoon, they were unoccupied. Going through into the cool darkness was as refreshing as the wine promised to be. The Spanish were famous for their fortified wines, especially those that came from the region of Jerez. René and James found an empty table next to the wall and waited for the tavern maid. She was struggling to extricate herself from a table of rowdy young men. By their dress, they were either nobility or of the wealthy trading class. The serving girl—a shapely young woman—had barely been able to place their drinks on the table before being handled, pinched, and passed among the men. René hated bullying of any kind. Though he knew it to be incredibly stupid, he was about to stand when she managed to get loose and back away from the table. She straightened her clothing and continued, as if what had transpired had been an annoying but expected part of her job. “Buenos días, señores,” she said, maintaining a discreet distance from the table. She had clearly had enough pawing for one day. “May I get you something to drink?” “Por favor, I would like a glass of Jerez. The finest available,” René said—or at least that was what he hoped he had said. “The sherry produced in Jerez is indeed the finest. Far better than Cadiz or Sevilla.” She smiled, obviously pleased to see some manners in evidence. “A glass of that would be fine, and perhaps some olives or almonds.” James cleared his throat, claiming her attention. “I will be about drinkin’ something as well.” “I speak some Inglés, señor. What for you to drink?” “Rum’ll be fine.” James sounded enthusiastic. “Sí, rum and sherry. Bien.” she sauntered away. René had already memorized the layout of the tavern and noted where everyone sat, an unconscious process he had learned long ago. The group of young men were still rowdy, but at least they kept it to their table. The only women in the tavern were the young tavern maid and a large older woman working behind the scarred mahogany bar. The drinks arrived, and the tavern maid was pleased enough with her tip to curtsey to René. In her smile were the beginnings of a network of information similar to that which had proved so valuable in Marseilles. The sherry was good, if perhaps a little too sweet for his taste. Still, it would make an excellent addition to the cargo he planned to bring back. James took a sip and sat back, at peace with the world. “Is the rum satisfactory?” René asked. “Is there a rum that is not? This one suits me fine, thank you.” The young dandies tried to stand, some having more difficulty than others. They managed to collect their things and stumble their way toward the door. As they passed René’s table, one pushed another, who fell against yet another, which caused the last to spill his drink onto René’s table. James and René jumped up and backed away in order to avoid the wine now dripping onto their seats. The young man inspected his empty glass, then the wine on the table, and finally his bloodshot eyes focused on René. “I believe you owe me a glass of wine, señor.” The Spaniard used the careful speech of one who’d had too much to drink. “Why is that?” René replied in French. “Ah, a Frenchie,” murmured one of the others. “Typical.” The offended Spaniard, clearly educated, easily switched into French. “Because you tripped me, which caused me to spill my wine—” He held up the empty glass wistfully. “—which I had my heart set on drinking.” “How could I have tripped you while I was seated here?” asked René pleasantly. “I am sorry, ’twas not me. I believe one of your friends may have accidentally bumped you.” “Raphael, he is calling you a liar,” another in their group slurred. “Definitely calling you a liar,” echoed one of the others. “How dare you call me a liar?” Raphael struggled to draw his sword. “Here, hold this.” He handed his wine glass to René so that he could use both hands to remove his sword from its sheath. The young Spaniard was clearly the son of a nobleman. His wine-colored velvet waistcoat, stained and dusty, attested to some vigorous activity earlier. His dress, along with the silver buckles on his shoes shouted wealth. Definitely not the clothes of a peasant. He blinked his clear blue eyes rapidly as he tried to focus on the pommel of the sword, which evidently refused to remain within his field of vision. Although he was dressed as a dandy, the sword he struggled to withdraw was a fine weapon, used and utilitarian. “Careful there, you will hurt someone with that.” René stepped back. Finally, with a sigh of great satisfaction, Raphael grasped the sword with his right hand and pulled it free. At the sight of naked steel, everyone, including his friends, backed away from him. The act of pulling the sword free had turned him around, and his back was now to René. He waved the sword and called, “Where are you, sir? Have you run like the coward you must be?” “Non, I am still here,” René answered. “There is no need to do this. If I somehow caused you to spill your drink, I apologize and will gladly replace it.” Raphael wobbled around and sighted René through glassy bloodshot eyes. “There you are. En garde!” René surveyed the group of young men, hoping to find one who might be sober enough to put an end to this. Each one, however, was deeper into his cups than the next. He searched elsewhere, but found only amusement and interest in diversion. Just like the jaded nobility of Bordeaux, these people would be happy for someone to be hurt as long as it was not them. If it happened to some stranger, all the better. René reluctantly drew his sword. “James, will you keep this one on one?” “Aye, aye, Captain.” James lifted the pistol from his belt, checked that the weapon was primed and cocked it. “If you gentlemen will be so kind as to back up there and not interfere, I will be so kind as to not blow your heads off.” Raphael’s inebriated companions backed up as quickly as their drink sodden muscles would carry them. “Thank you.” James leaned back against the wall, his pistol at the ready. “So then. How will this duel proceed?” asked René. “Will we fight to first blood or to incapacitation?” “Firsh blood will be fine. I do not need to kill anyone today,” Raphael was trying, without complete success, to hold himself in an en garde position. “That is a good thing, because frankly, today is a poor day for me to be killed. En garde, then.” The way the man stood, or tried to stand, made it clear that he was a trained swordsman. That was good. Training made him a little less liable to hurt himself by doing stupid novice moves. Raphael thrust the sword at where René had been standing, only to find he was no longer there. René had moved aside, still in en garde position. Raphael thrust at him again. There was a rasping sound, and the young Spaniard stood empty handed. “You have stolen my sword, sir,” he accused René. René laughed and bent down, picked up the sword, and handed it to Raphael. “Non, monsieur, you dropped it. Here you are.” “En garde, sir.” Raphael thrust forward with a stamp of his foot. Again, that rasping sound. Again, the sword lay vibrating on the floor. Raphael stared at his empty hand, a bewildered expression on his face. “We cannot fight if I do not have a sword.” René bit the inside of his cheek to stop from laughing. This was obviously a gentle soul, and René had no interest in humiliating him, let alone hurting him. “I think there must be some defect within the sword itself, sir.” He reached down and picked up the sword and then handed it back to Raphael. “Are you insulting my sword, sir? I will have you know this blade is from Toledo. Finest steel there is.” He took a deep breath, swayed, and then began to fall. René reached out to catch him before he crashed into the table. “I guess I showed you all right,” Raphael snorted. “I guess you did. ’Twas a fine duel. I barely escaped with my life. Do you think you can make it home all right?” “You know, you need to be careful dueling. You could get hurt,” Raphael slurred as he teetered back and
 forth. “I will have to keep that in mind.” The moment René let go of his shoulders, Raphael started to fall. Turning to his friends, René asked, “Would one of you gentlemen come and see Raphael home?” “What am I, a child?” Raphael bolted upright and then weaved his way toward the door, followed by his friends. “What is your name? In case we should meet again,” called René. “Zaportas. Raphael d’Ortega Zaportas, at your servish, sir.” He attempted a bow. Fortunately it was aimed at the entrance, as it carried him through the door to crash outside. The name caused René to stop. A relative perhaps? Coincidence had long ago lost its meaning for René. René ran to the door to make certain Raphael had not accidentally stabbed himself. The young nobles were struggling to assist each other onto their saddles. Except for the one who climbed on top of a horse trough. Finally, they were all mounted. If the horses failed to find the way back to their own stables, these men would be riding around until they sobered up. Returning to the tavern, René spotted Raphael’s sword on the ground. “It is an insult to your sword to find itself on the ground. It came from the earth, but it no longer belongs to the earth, having been purified in the fire. You, however, have not been purified in the fire, so do not be insulted if you find yourself in the dirt.” The Maestro offered his hand to René to help the boy up. That had been a long afternoon of open-handed techniques which left René almost continually on his backside. He smiled at the fond memory and retrieved the abandoned sword. CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR JAMES AND Emile were unhappy. René did not care. “Let me repeat myself so as to remove any misunderstanding. Under no circumstances are you to take anyone aboard against his will, and that includes the drunk or unconscious. “Aye, aye, Captain. But we are gonna have a hell of a time findin’ enough bodies to man both ships,” James complained. “Be that as it may, we will not have anyone aboard who did not intend to be aboard. Is that perfectly clear?” René asked, his voice a notch quieter. The men nodded, realizing the discussion was at an end. “Yes, sir,” Emile answered for both of them. “Understood, sir. And we will find enough men pleased to sail aboard our ships.” “We will?” James asked. Emile winked at him. “Oh, yes, we definitely will.” René allowed himself an evil smile. “I know the both of you, and if you offer the men more than we pay, I promise you will have the privilege of paying them the difference out of your own wages. Is that understood?” “Aye, aye, sir,” said Emile, deflated. “We will do our best.” “Of that I am certain. Now if you will excuse me, I would like to speak to Sheikh Ghassan before I leave. I will be at the Villa de Zaportas for a few days until Abdul Karim arrives. We have negotiated a satisfactory price for our cargos, but if the factor encounters any difficulties, you can contact me there.” René rode up to a filigreed wrought iron gate where two young men stood guard. They appeared to be awaiting his arrival. Well dressed, they wore shoes and stockings. Unusual attire for servants in a semi-tropical area such as Malaga. René introduced himself, first in French and then in halting Spanish when it became clear they spoke nothing else. They recognized his name and both bowed. “Bienvenido, señor.” “Gracias,” René replied. The servant smiled, took the horse’s reins, and led him toward the hacienda. A broad veranda of polished cedar stretched the length of the house. Sleek ceramic vases overflowing with flowers formed nooks along its length coupled with comfortable-looking chairs. Flowering vines ran up the stone pillars that supported the over-hanging roof. René dismounted and climbed the broad steps to the porch. The Zaportas family boiled out of the doorway to meet him. The sheikh had told him he would be welcomed. He should have known it would be enthusiastic. “Monsieur Gilbert!” Señor Zaportas hugged René. “I cannot tell you how glad I was to hear from my old friend Ammar. Hospitality demands I wait to hear all the details of his recent exploits, but you must assure me he is well.” “He is in good health, sir, and sends you, in his words, ‘Every joy an old man can find.’” “Old man? Bah!” Miguel Zaportas paused, his expression one of remembering. An image of the sheikh and Miguel as young men, full of intelligence and spirit and bent on molding the world to their ideals, flew into René’s mind. The man’s pale blue eyes projected a strong intelligence and a powerful awareness. Tall and slim like his son, his balanced stance showed that he too was a trained swordsman. Señor Zaportas expressive pause happened in the blink of an eye and then, with an almost audible snap, he was fully back in the present and focused on René. Only the Maestro had ever shown the intensity of focus now directed at him. Zaportas smiled and in that smile, somehow, René was welcomed, not only into a family, but also into a larger reality. “I am so glad he is well.” Zaportas looped his arm around René’s shoulders. “Allow me to introduce you to my family. My wife, Señora Rebeca Zaportas.” “Señora.” René bowed to her. “Ammar Faruq Ghassan has me say he apologizes for his absence, and that he still feels Miguel is the luckiest of men.” She was a petite woman with warm brown eyes. Standing close to her, René sensed the vital force snapping around her. She reached her arm out and linked it through his, bringing him in closer to her. René had caught the wink she directed toward her husband that was filled with an intense exchange of communication. “And you may tell that old liar he had his chance long ago. Opportunities rarely come by twice,” she said with a laugh. “I will relay what you say word for word, señora,” René said, grinning. “My son, Raphael.” She swept her right hand toward him. René met Raphael’s eyes, eyes filled with a desperate plea. “’Tis a pleasure to meet you, señor.” René extended his hand as if they were meeting for the first time. “And you, sir.” Relief swept across Raphael’s face. “And last, if only in age, my daughter Raquel,” said Señor Zaportas. The young woman, who René judged to be about fifteen, was already showing signs of becoming a true beauty, with long auburn hair and flashing dark eyes. She cast an appraising glance in his direction. He bowed to her. “Señorita, I think the sheikh will be surprised to see you. You are most definitely not the little girl he described to me.” “You are too kind, monsieur.” She dipped in a practiced curtsy. “I do wish he had come as well. Will we be able to visit him aboard your ship?” René caught her father’s eye and received a nod. “Raquel, I promise you we will have a party aboard the Seahawk before we depart. I know Akeefa and Sheikh Ghassan would not want to leave without seeing you.” Raquel’s smile grew wider at the mention of a party. “Father, may I show Monsieur Gilbert to his rooms?” Her voice rose in excitement as all attempts to emulate adult reserve vanished. “Si, you may, my dear,” he said. “Monsieur Gilbert, I will have the servants collect your things and bring them to your rooms. Rest. We look forward to dinner.” Raquel took possession of René’s arm and led him into the house. He glanced at Raphael and mouthed “I have it,” to let him know he had brought the sword. Then he turned his attention to Raquel’s rapid-fire questions about life on the high seas. His room was luxurious in the extreme. Glass inlaid doors opened out onto a private veranda and garden. In the center of the garden, brilliantly colored carp swam in a tiled pool that circled a bubbling fountain. The heady scent of flowers filled the room. One wall was decorated with a huge tapestry on which animals depicted the story of Genesis. The floor was cool tile covered with finely woven carpets, and a large canopied bed made of Lebanese cedar promised a comfortable sleep. In an adjacent room, René was amazed to find a basin through which a steady stream of water flowed. As he walked to the back of that room, he found a marble seat with a hole in it, underneath which water rushed. He eyed the seat until he finally figured it out, and was even more impressed at the creativity involved. A five foot square empty marble depression with stairs leading into its depth graced the corner of the room. René looked forward to taking his first hot bath in a long time. A knock sounded on his door. He left off his inspection and returned to the main room. Raphael stood sheepishly in the doorway. “I wanted to apologize before you rested.” “Come in. I hope you are feeling better.” He walked to his bags and then passed the wrapped sword to Raphael. “I am certain you have learned that too much wine and a sharp sword do not mix well.” “My behavior was inexcusable.” Raphael lowered his head and accepted the sword. “As you must realize, I am not an accomplished drinker. In fact, I rarely have more than a glass of wine. We had come from a bullfight, and our man was victorious. I was already drunk before we left the arena. I would be grateful if this incident were to remain between the two of us. My father would be less than pleased to hear of my behavior.” “What incident?” asked René with a grin. “Exactly,” Raphael laughed. “Gracias. I will leave you to rest, and I do suggest you try to do so, for between my father and my sister you will have none until late this evening. I must admit, I too cannot wait to hear of your adventures as well as your proposals for more to come.” “I assure you, adventures are not nearly as much fun when you are in their midst as when you are relating them over a fine dinner. I will take you up on the offer to rest, but first I must ask how to fill the bathing pool. Is it possible to get hot water? I assume that it is for bathing.” “My father is an inventive man, which is probably why we are still alive and prospering
 here in Malaga, instead of living in Marrakech or Alexandria. Come, I will show you how to work it.” Raphael walked into the next room. “You may have all the hot water you wish.” After perhaps the most luxurious bath he had ever taken, René took Raphael’s advice and collapsed into a bed filled with goose down. Too much time had passed since he was this comfortable and relaxed. His eyelids grew heavy as the late afternoon sounds lulled him to sleep. “Señor,” a female voice called through René’s closed door. “Master Zaportas suggests you awaken and dress. He requests the honor of your presence for a glass of wine, and if I may enter, he sends some cakes to take the edge off your hunger.” “Por favor, come in.” René tugged the covers over his bare shoulders. A young woman entered, and keeping her eyes focused on the floor she set a tray with coffee and small cakes on the bedside table. She bowed and backed out of the room. “Gracias, señorita,” René called after her. “De nada,” she said as his door clicked shut. He jumped out of bed, pulled on his breeches, and then poured himself a cup of coffee. He had been looking forward to Spanish coffee. For some reason, he was more optimistic than he had been in a long while. Filled with excited anticipation, he sipped the coffee. It was still sweet, but not as thick as that which he had enjoyed as a guest of Sheikh Ghassan. He ate one of the small cakes, savoring the delightful taste of almonds, citrus, and honey. With cup in hand, he walked out to the veranda and then sat on one of the chaises to relax with the early evening sounds and smells of the garden. He closed his eyes and allowed his senses to expand. The experience filled him with awe. He had never sensed a group of souls in more harmonious cooperation than those here. These people were content and felt safe. They were awake for he sensed a heated discussion between two women baking bread. Rather, it was as though these people knew they belonged, knew what was required of them, and had unquestionable faith that Miguel Zaportas would protect them. It was a wonderful feeling, strange and unusual in his world, but wonderful just the same. “Why is it so rare for people to work together to accomplish what appear to be reasonably common desires?” Thirteen-year-old René asked the Maestro as he walked across the courtyard, arms extended, with a brick in each hand. “Your error lies in the word ‘reasonably.’ You assume our species is, or can be, reasonable—that is, to come to conclusions based on reason alone.” “Even with training?” “It is a function of who we are, and not who we want or choose to be.” “But you have taught me to control my emotions,” René said, carefully placing the bricks down and returning to the pile for two more. “And have I not also taught you that your emotions are horses that can never be completely tamed?” the Maestro asked before taking a sip of tea. “Then we are doomed.” “Perhaps.” “Perhaps? What is the answer then?” After a slight pause, the Maestro replied. “I do not know.” That was the first time René ever heard the Maestro say those words. They stopped him as if he had run into a wall. René looked at the Maestro, who, until that moment, he had thought was in possession of every answer to every question. All of a sudden, the ground seemed to move, and he felt a new fear. “You do not know?” asked René, hoping he had misheard. “But there may be an answer. Oui?” “Looking around at the world, I am confident the perfection that is evident extends to us as well. The fact I haven’t been able to discern it yet doesn’t negate the possibility of its existence. Frightening is it not?” “Very.” “There is no natural destructive force greater than fear. I have taught you not to fear that which you know, and now it is time to learn not to fear that which you do not know. Please pick up your sword; we will spar while we are talking. Time is also a resource not to be wasted.” René stood, a greater sense of purpose crystallizing within. He would surround those he loved with this sense of peace and safety. If Miguel Zaportas could create this oasis, so could he. He had no illusions he could do it immediately, or without pain, but here finally was something he could build instead of destroy. CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE THE ‘GREAT room’ in the Zaportas’ estate was dominated by an oversized hearth and fireplace. Its polished wooden floors were covered with Arabian carpets. A round table of dark mahogany sat off to one side. Stuffed leather chairs were situated around the room in intimate groupings. Paintings decorated the walls, some undoubtedly of ancestors. One large wall mural depicted a naval battle which René thought must be the Spanish Armada’s loss to Sir Francis Drake. There were two deep burgundy leather chairs facing each other in front of the fire, and he only now noticed Señor Zaportas seated in one of them. Miguel rose from his chair and smiled. “I usually give people a moment to take in the room. I am proud of it. Por favor, sit.” He indicated the chair opposite his. “Will you take a glass of sherry?” “Merci, that would be fine.” René accepted the glass and seated himself. Like everything he had seen in this home, the chair was engineered to give maximum human comfort, and it succeeded. Señor Zaportas refilled his glass and settled back into his own chair. There was a moment of quiet as each man took the measure of the other. “Ammar has written to me of you. He says you are a most unusual young man. Perhaps the man in this next generation to carry on for us, when we are no longer here.” René had the strange sensation that Miguel was looking into his soul. “Are you that man?” “What am I meant to carry on?” “Why, the fight to preserve what is decent within man, and to protect those who cannot protect themselves.” “That seems like a Herculean task,” said René, struggling to understand. “It is and requires no less than a hero to accomplish it, for even a moment of time.” Señor Zaportas sipped his wine. René was at a loss for words, unable to encompass the scope of the ideas this serious man had just proposed, but evidently, Zaportas had seen what he needed to see. His demeanor switched back to that of the heartily cheerful man from earlier. “Tell me of my old friend Ammar.” René sucked in a deep breath and allowed himself to enter that unique sense of focus where time slowed. Fully invested in Señor Zaportas’ brief description of his and the sheikh’s expectations, he wanted to know more. They had been sparring and practicing basic thrust-and- block techniques for over two hours, and René was getting bored. “Patience is a power to be cultivated,” said the Maestro. “Is it more important than balance?” asked ten-year-old René. “Say rather that it is an integral part of balance,” said the Maestro. “The planets are in balance, and their power is limitless. Yet there is a sublime patience to their dance through the ether beyond the earth, for were they to be impatient, they would surely fall into the sun and burn up. The biblical ‘To everything there is a season’ is truth. We will practice patience until it is second nature to you, and in its mastery you will know when to rest and when to act.” As the Maestro said the last word, he brought down a slashing cut to René’s shoulder that René automatically blocked. “That was the appropriate time to act. Never use more effort than the moment calls for, and you will have all you need.” Maestro returned to basic thrust and block techniques. “The sheikh is in excellent health and condition,” he answered, remembering the fight within the tent. As if he sensed René’s thoughts, Miguel turned to glance into the fire. A long moment later he returned his gaze to René. “He always was quite the swordsman. When we were younger, we were both proud of our prowess. He writes that you are perhaps the finest swordsman he has ever seen.” “I am certain he exaggerates.” “I am certain he does not. Of all the men I know, Ammar has always been the most sparing in his praise for his fellow man. Do you not find him that way?” “Oui, I must agree. He is less demonstrative with his praise than he is with his acceptance.” There was far more information flowing between them than the spoken words suggested. René found the plane of conversation rarified, but exhilarating. “Just so. Which brings me to a favor I must ask of you, even before we have dinner. You have met Raphael.” The declaratory statement implied a greater awareness of his son than had the brief meeting at the door. René settled even deeper into his center. While this was not a battle, it was a kind of sparring, and he had given his word to Raphael. Miguel Zaportas would know a lie, and yet René was determined to honor his word. “I have,” René said, giving neither more nor less information than he had received. Señor Zaportas smiled in genuine pleasure. “We are living in the era of the duel, and while my son has had the advantage of every teacher of the sword I could find, I am still not satisfied as to his safety.” “There is never safety within the controlled chaos that is a duel.” “Raphael is a fine swordsman, and yet there is something lacking which I fear will be his downfall. He can see nothing but good in his fellow man, and I am afraid this empathy will blind him. I believe Raphael used up his allotment of good fortune in meeting you.” He shook his head. “I wonder if what I see is true, or merely a doting father’s fear.” The father was clearly aware of the ‘duel’ that had taken place. There was no anger coming from the elder Zaportas though, only relief and worry. Apparently within the confines of Malaga—and perhaps all of Spain—not much transpired that Miguel Zaportas failed to know about. “How may I help you, sir?” “Ah, Ammar is correct, as usual. I would have you tutor Raphael in the sword while you are here. I realize you may not be at
 our hacienda for long, but perhaps you could find the time to give him a greater appreciation of the weapon he wears. Would you be willing to teach him?” “On one condition.” “And that is?” “That he is willing to learn, and not because you wish it. I can force my men to learn to defend themselves with the threat of my sword, but I cannot do that with your son. If he does not have a deep desire to learn, I will be unable to teach him, and the result will be nothing but frustration for all concerned.” “’Tis his desire to become proficient with the sword. I will let him ask you himself. You are a perceptive judge of men, sir. I leave it to you to judge his intentions and abide by your decision.” René nodded. “I will not embarrass you with an offer of gold, for I am certain you perceive that my son’s safety is beyond any value to me. I will rather offer you the gratitude of a father and hope one day you find my assistance as valuable to you as yours is to me.” Miguel settled deeper into his chair. René also allowed himself to relax now that this particular exercise was completed. The quick burst of euphoria that always came after a particularly strenuous sparring session with someone of equal skill and power wrapped around him. He fancied he saw a hint of it in Miguel’s eyes, too. They raised their glasses to one another and sipped their sherry. “I believe I hear the impatient conversation of my lovely wife and daughter coming from the dining room. It might be unhealthy for us to tarry in here much longer.” Señor Zaportas stood. “Shall we join them?” “I would be delighted to, sir.” René followed Miguel into the dining room. An elegant Arabic carpet of deep reds and grays woven in linked floral patterns covered the entire floor. Suspended from the high ceiling, a finely crafted chandelier of wrought iron, gold leaf, and crystals sent a warm glow over a large mahogany dining table. Embroidered red and gold tapestries graced the chairs while a tablecloth of pale linen set with porcelain and intricately fashioned silver completed the table setting. At the end of the room, a fire burned in a magnificent hearth. Eight feet wide and five feet high, topped with a large mahogany mantle, this hearth radiated warmth and welcome. In winter evenings, the temperature along the Spanish coast cooled quickly, and the crackling fire added an even greater sense of comfort. René had seen many a gracious dining room in Bordeaux but none that surpassed this one. René was seated next to Raquel with Raphael across the table and Señor and Señora Zaportas at its ends. “I trust you had a nice rest, René?” asked Rebeca. Elegantly coiffed, she seemed a completely different woman from the one who had greeted him earlier. Her dress was of wine-colored silk with complex geometrical patterns in black moving across the material. For jewelry, she wore a black silk ribbon with a large pearl suspended from it, matched by dangling pearl earrings. René was transported once again to the glittering nobility of Bordeaux. If Rebeca was beautiful, Raquel was stunning. In a green velvet gown with her shining auburn hair piled atop her head, Raquel was a heart-stopping announcement of the beauty she would soon become. Around her neck was an emerald necklace that must be worth a king’s ransom. As accustomed as he was to the glitter of the wealthy merchants of Bordeaux, it took a moment for him to reclaim speech. “I have not slept more comfortably or more soundly since I left home. ’Twas wonderful. Merci for your gracious hospitality.” In honor of René, the first wine served was from Bordeaux, which he immediately recognized as having come from Cos Gilbert’s own vineyards. “How…where…” he stumbled at a loss for words. “I have certain resources. Once Ammar had written to me, it was not difficult to locate a wine with a reputation as good as this one’s. Have no fear, we are aware of your situation and will not betray your existence.” Miguel stood and lifted his glass toward René. “And now, our first—but not last—toast to a gallant young man. May your endeavors bear fruit that will feed many. Salud.” Everyone stood and “Salud” echoed around the table. “May I return your good wishes?” Still standing, René held up his glass. “To life.” There was a moment of silence around the table. Heat crawled up René’s neck. Had he insulted his hosts? But then the elder Zaportas bowed his head, as did the rest of his family, and they all but whispered, “L’chiam.” There was a pause and then Miguel asked everyone to be seated. Seeing René’s discomfort, he explained. “You must know from Ammar that we are Maranos, converted Jews. We are Catholic on the outside and Jewish on the inside. The toast you made is one filled with meaning for us. One we do not often say aloud, since it belonged to our homeland in Judea. That we remain Jewish in our hearts is a closely held secret. To treat it otherwise would endanger us all.” “I understand, sir. You may be assured I will not betray your confidence.” “René, no one enters my home I cannot welcome as family. In all the years I have known Ammar Ghassan, I have never heard him say, ‘Welcome this one as my son.’ From our brief time spent together, I heartily concur with my friend.” “How have you managed to remain in Spain?” “It has not been easy. Jews have been imprisoned, tortured, and burned here for the last three hundred years.” “There were many different levels of Maranos,” Rebeca added. “Some who embraced Christianity whole-heartedly, some who did so for their own protection, and some who were called Judíos Escondidos, or hidden Jews. This last group remained Jewish, continuing to follow their traditions when they could, but always at great risk. Our family comes from one such group.” “Nevertheless,” continued Miguel, “Spain became too dangerous— even for us. My grandfather Arturo Diego Zaportas moved our family to Morocco where we forged a deep friendship with Ammar Ghassan’s family. My father grew up in Morocco, and I brought the family back here with his passing. Unfortunately, the storm has not abated, it merely waxes and wanes. The tide is, I believe, coming back in, and I fear it will soon be too dangerous for us to remain in Malaga. I am preparing to move my family to our estates in Morocco.” Señor Zaportas shook his head. “But I am embarrassed. How have we descended to this level of hospitality? Surely we can find something more uplifting to discuss.” How about pirates?” Raquel piped in. Laughter broke out around the table. It was as though they had cleansed the air of fear, and the dinner proceeded with gusto. Course after course rolled by with various wines served to compliment each dish. Red peppers stuffed with tuna, grilled sea prawns, chicken consommé, Segovian style trout, gazpacho, and they still had the meat courses to go. René told them of his earlier difficulties in Bordeaux, and of the Vrijheid, now renamed the Seahawk. He started to tell of the Belle Poulé when Raquel interrupted. “Is Khalid with you?” she asked. “As a matter of fact, he is.” “Oh.” She suddenly took a great interest in sliding her food around her plate. “She has quite the infatuation with Khalid,” offered Raphael. “I do not.” Dramatically indignant, the flush of her face gave conflicting testimony. “I was only interested in who would be at the party, and anyway—” “He is much too old for you,” Raphael said. “For now,” she said, with a knowing smile. Miguel shook his head and looked at his wife, who nodded in return, but her expression remained blank. “What was it like in Morocco?” asked René. “Much like anywhere else, only poorer. We lived in Marrakech, and there were kasbahs that were hovels alongside some of the most beautiful of palaces. We continued in our profession as merchants and traders, and while there were difficulties, we managed.” Miguel took a bite of lamb tagine. “What of the Salé corsairs?” He swallowed and then continued, “They were still active, but my father generally managed to come to some accommodation with their leaders, often with the help of the Ghassans. You see, we were all refugees.” “Refugees?” “Almost sixty years ago, Philip III forcibly expelled one million Spanish Moors. Some, called Hornacheros, after their mountain home in Spain, settled in the coastal town of Rabat and named their settlement New Salé. They learned to sail square-riggers, made alliances with various pirates, and the rest is a sad and often bloody history of slave-trading.” “The English call them Sallee Rovers,” Raphael said. “To their Islamic brethren they are known as al-ghuzat, after the warriors who fought with Mohammed. Since like them, we were outcasts, they tolerated us.” Miguel paused, sadness replaced his usual cheerful expression. “My father did his best to protect and repatriate the Spaniards who were taken into slavery, but it was hard acting on behalf of the people who had persecuted us.” “Jews have always been familiar with slavery,” Rebeca said. “What of Sheikh Ghassan’s family?” asked René. “The sheikh’s ancestors were expelled from another part of Spain but fortunately were able to join family already living in Morocco,” Miguel said. “My brother David and his family still live in Morocco. They moved from Marrakech to Meknes some time ago. We felt it prudent to maintain a place of retreat should the situation warrant our leaving Spain again.” “Do you believe the situation here has reached that point?” “Sadly, I do. I have already moved most of my resources and business out of Spain. Perhaps my love for this place has become too deeply rooted, but I find it hard to leave this home. It has been a place of love for a number of years now, but I cannot delude myself into thinking us safe. The last auto de fe was nine years ago, and I sense another one building.” Servants cleared away the dishes while others brought in dessert, along with coffee. A
 young woman placed assorted almond confections on the table, and a large older woman, clearly in charge of the dinner’s preparation, placed a pastry with a delicate crust in the shape of a half moon in front of each of the diners. “What is this? It looks wonderful,” said René. “We call it Floron,” answered Señora Zaportas. “It is Segovian pastry with a cream custard filling. I think you will like it.” “Will there be anything else, señor?” asked a woman whose very presence commanded attention. “Gracias, Carmen, the dinner was excellent as usual. At this point, not even your great skill can induce us to eat another bite.” Carmen failed to hide her grin as she nodded to the servants who followed her out. The pastry was indeed wonderful and disappeared quickly. Even as full as he was, René considered asking for another piece, and as if someone had read his mind, there materialized in front of him another dish of Floron. He smiled sheepishly. “Gracias.” “Our pleasure,” said Señora Zaportas. “Dinner was exquisite, as usual.” Miguel patted his stomach. “Gracias, my dear.” “May I also add gracias, señora? Welcoming me into your home has been special, something I will never forget,” René said. “Por favor, you may consider yourself a part of this family, and we do not take family lightly. I hope we will enjoy many dinners like this one.” “So do I, señora, so do I.” “Well, dear, may we be excused?” Miguel asked his wife. “There is still some business to be discussed and some brandy to be drunk.” “Of course.” She stood and beckoned to Raquel. “Gentlemen.” René pushed his chair back and then bowed to the ladies as they left the room. René followed Raphael and Señor Zaportas into the great room. There were now three of the deeply stuffed leather chairs facing the fireplace, each with a small table beside it. Miguel took his accustomed chair and Raphael sat across from him, leaving the chair in the middle for René. A servant entered and poured brandy snifters for each of the men, then offered each a cigar, beginning with Señor Zaportas. For a time, they sat in silence, drinking brandy and occasionally puffing on the cigars. “Are you in agreement that Sultan al-Rashid should be supported?” asked René. “To exist anywhere in even minimal safety, one must establish some line of communication and expectation with the existing rulers,” Miguel answered. “The reason we managed to flourish in Morocco is because no central government or ruler existed. Morocco was ruled by different clans or tribes, some more powerful, some less. In the last seventy years or so, since the fall of the Saadian dynasty, that chaos has allowed our families to prosper.” “And now that Moulay al-Rashid has declared himself Sultan of all Morocco, it behooves us to establish a connection with him by sending him support in a form that will help him the most,” René said. “Exactly.” Miguel stood and walked to the fireplace. “Weapons have always been a commodity in great demand by the pashas and sheikhs,” said Raphael. “Gold and silver, they have. Weapons and those trained to use them, they lack.” “Sheikh Ghassan believes al-Rashid will be more moderate than most,” said René. “Do you believe this as well?” “Moderate? No, that is not the word I would use. I believe, however, he will act in his own interest, and it will be possible to align our interests with his,” Miguel said. “There will be risk, but when is there not? With your permission, I would like Raphael to accompany you, to begin preparing for our emigration back to Morocco.” “Of course, he is welcome to join us.” “Raphael is an accomplished pilot and will earn his keep by helping you navigate the waters around Morocco,” added Miguel as he turned to look at Raphael. Raphael’s expression of surprise made it clear that he had been unaware of his father’s plans. He sat up straighter. “I accept the faith you place in me, Father, and will do my best.” “I know you will, and I ask your forgiveness for not having   spoken with you about this before. It was not until tonight’s conversation that I knew the time was now. I have seen what I wished to see, rather than what is. I only hope I have not waited too long.” Conversation ceased. René glanced at his hosts. Both men stared into the fire as if contemplating the future and the speed with which it could arrive. CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX THE NEXT morning Abdul Karim Ghassan came into the dining room as René poured himself a cup of coffee. The sheikh’s eldest son was a big man who exuded confident power with every movement. Dressed in breeches and waistcoat, his coal black hair neatly tied in the back with a leather thong, Abdul Karim looked the part of a wealthy young Spaniard. His mustache and beard were trimmed in the current fashion, and his perfect fluency in the language completed the transformation. His appearance and demeanor, along with his trading experience, was why he had been chosen to travel to Toledo for the swords. “Monsieur Gilbert, ’tis good to see you,” boomed Abdul Karim. He glanced at Raphael and said, “And buenos dias to you, my old friend.” “’Tis good to see you as well,” said René. “Your smile tells me your business was successful and that we are moving ahead with our plans.” “Yes, I have had the weapons unloaded into a warehouse near your ships. We will transfer them aboard tomorrow.” Abdul Karim pulled over a chair and then sat. “’Tis been a while since I have seen you, but you look to be in one piece,” said Raphael. “I think the biggest challenge was the food.” “The food?” Raphael asked. “Every time I took a bite of dried beef, I could not help but think about Carmen’s cooking. I am glad to finally be here.” The two men laughed. “And we are glad you made it safely,” said Miguel, as he walked into the room. “Carmen! These men are starving.” “Señor.” She nodded and waved in a line of servants, each carrying a steaming platter. The table soon groaned beneath the weight of all the food. “There will not be any starving going on in this house.” “Not likely,” Miguel laughed. “Gracias, Carmen.” Abdul Karim faced her and put his hand on his heart. “Muchas gracias, dear Carmen, from the bottom of my heart.” She blushed. “Abdul Karim, you have always been a charmer,” she said as she ushered the last of the servants out. “Did you encounter any difficulties in obtaining the weapons?” asked Miguel. “We ran into some bandits on the way back from Toledo, but the fight was short, and none of my men were badly injured.” “How many were there?” asked Raphael. “Eight.” “How many men were with you?” asked René. “And what became of the bandits?” “I had three men with me. Since the bandits were unable to run, being injured or dead, we helped the survivors into the afterlife so they could be with their friends,” said Abdul Karim with a cold smile. “Frankly, I am embarrassed it took the four of us. I have neglected my practice and will address that as soon as possible. I may even ask Akeefa to spar with me.” He glanced at René and shuddered. “I have seen you in a fight, and I will pass on sparring with you.” “’Tis an eye-opening experience,” said Raphael. “René has agreed to work with me and I have experienced one lesson. I welcome your presence.” “I think you might need someone with more medical training, but I will be happy to join you.” Miguel put his coffee down. “Abdul Karim, tell me, what arrangements you have made?” “Once the factors complete the inventory and exchange papers, we can begin loading the ships. René, I heard you added another ship to your armada. I look forward to hearing that story in detail.” “We missed you. It will be good to have you on board.” “And I am glad to return home. It has been a long time, and I sometimes find it difficult being with you infidels.” He laughed. “Infidels!” said Raphael. “I will ask Carmen to come in here so you can call her an infidel.” “I would prefer a thousand cuts with a dull blade. You must forgive me. There is hardly any blood in my head. It has all been diverted to my stomach.” Abdul Karim rubbed his belly. “Well, I will let it pass this time, since you apparently have managed to fulfill your part of our business. But with the next derogatory word that passes your lips, I tell Carmen.” Raphael broke into a broad grin. Turning to René, he said, “That threat always worked when we were children, and ’tis good to see it still holds power.” Miguel smiled at the banter. “René, I see by your expression that some confusion over our families and relationships has emerged. Ammar and I wanted to give our children the widest experience possible, so we fostered our sons with each other’s family. Abdul Karim spent some years with us, and Raphael spent time with the Ghassans. Currently, my brother David’s eldest is living with the Ghassans.” “Merci. That does clarify things,” said René. “May we be excused, Father?” asked Raphael. “We have important matters to discuss.” “I am certain you do.” Miguel laughed. “Keep me informed. I would like to have those weapons loaded aboard the Seahawk as soon as possible.” “We will.” Raphael stood and headed toward the great room. Abdul Karim and René, who were already discussing the transfer of cargo, followed him. CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN RENÉ LEANED on the rail of the Belle Poulé rereading the letter he had received from Henri. The Gilbert Ltd. factor in Marseilles had been instructed to forward any mail for a Monsieur Dalembert to the harbormaster in Malaga. Dear Monsieur Dalembert, It was so nice to hear from you. I cannot even begin to express our joy in finding you well. We were saddened to hear of your recent difficulties but pleased you have been able to work your way through them. Chez Gilbert has seen better days but is now on the mend, seeing that the weather has changed. Marie had taken ill at the news of her favorite nephew’s demise but has now recovered her spirit and is once again the ruler
 of our kitchen. I, too, have been suffering from melancholy but am pleased to report I have smiled more in these last days than in my whole life John has been working with Orion. The strangest thing happened. When you last left us, the horse went off his feed. I have never seen a horse respond like that. Damned horse would have died if not for John, who eventually was able to bring him back to health. A young woman you met when you were here last has, I believe, also received a letter from you. Be assured she is well, and you may expect to hear from her. If you notice my handwriting changes from time to time, please excuse me, as I sometimes get the rhumatisme in my hand. The handwriting changed. Henri had written the first page to help disguise the letter in case of interception. The rest of it was from his father. Every word connected René to the life he had known and at the same time made him acutely aware of the distance between them. It is difficult to find the words to express my relief and joy that you are safe. I have written to your teacher to apprise him of the situation but have not yet heard back from him. I am certain he would be pleased with the way you have handled this business. Trade has been good, with one competitor fiercer than ever. This competitor is in Paris meeting with the new finance minister, Colbert, where he is surely helping devise something financially destructive for the wealth and well-being of the merchant class. The new finance minister is cold and driven and appears determined to consolidate all financial power into the hands of the crown. We anxiously await his declarations with our wallets and re-maining freedom. This new chain of events, however, fills me with determination, and I am positive Gilbert Ltd. will not only survive the onslaught, but triumph. As per our discussions, I have deeded the Belle Poulé to you. You will also find letters of credit established with the following factors. (See addendum.) I am confident that together our business will prosper. I have reviewed your bus-iness plan, and while the risks seem great, the rewards seem so as well.  As you may deduce, I am not overjoyed at the level of risk this venture entails but well know from years of experience that it is often impossible to evaluate a plan from a distance. The captain of the ship must have the authority to change direction as he must to accommodate wind and weather. We have Gilbert Ltd. factors in the ports of Tangier, Casablanca, and Alexandria who may be of service to you. I have alerted each to the possibility of your trading there. No matter what transpires from this moment on, I am proud of you, and I will always be so. I am sitting here at the dining room table sipping my tea and working over my reports, and I envision you coming down the stairs to join me. I am in good health, and God willing we will meet again to discuss our mutual concerns and joys. With great affection I remain, Henri Bouvier René stood savoring the gentle rocking of the ship. Two competing emotions vied for his attention: regret that he was yet unable to return to Bordeaux, unable to join his father at the dining room table in the morning, discussing the day’s prospects, while at the same time he experienced deep satisfaction at the way he had been able to influence events. He now officially owned two ships, and Jacques was right when he said many had started with less. The refit of the Belle Poulé was almost finished. René had promoted James to the captaincy of the Seahawk. René would move over to the larger ship with the Ghassan family and their retainers. The carpenters had been busy, and the Belle Poulé now boasted six cabins, with one of the additional two housing Raphael and Abdul Karim. He questioned himself as to why he added the sixth cabin, since it cut into the cargo capacity of the ship. But he had long ago learned to accept whatever information his deeper self offered. He rarely thought long about it now; he acted on it, and in so doing, strengthened the faculty. They had replaced all of the sheets and sail on the Belle Poulé, as well as the jury-rigged yardarm, and had repaired the other battle damage. A powerful wave of energy impinged against his own, and René turned as Akeefa came on deck. As usual, she was covered head to toe. He marveled at her grace as she walked toward him. “Good afternoon,” he said. “And to you as well.” She came to stand beside him at the rail. “How does the loading go?” “Smoothly so far. We will finish this afternoon and set sail in two days.” “When will Raphael come aboard?” Akeefa asked. “He should be here already. I was waiting for him to show up.” “I am eager to see him,” she said with a thoughtful look in her eye. “He is a fine swordsman.” René laughed. “He recalls sparring with you, as well.” He was watching the dock as Raphael raced up the road toward the ships, but something was wrong. No one ever rode that fast unless there was trouble. “Akeefa, something is wrong. S’il vous plaît, alert your family. I will go to meet him.” René was already sprinting for the amidships railing. He dashed across the boarding plank to the quay. He got to the end of the dock as Raphael rode up, his horse lathered and blowing. Raphael jumped from the horse and grabbed René by the arms. “They have taken them. I was on my way here when I heard musket fire from the house. I went back, but hid on the ridge. There were too many. Come, we must go.” Raphael wheezed, struggling to regain his breath. René radiated stillness. As it had all those months ago, everything stopped. “You are not a callow youth. Oui, I know ’tis your family, but if we rush forward without a plan or sufficient resources, we will be of no service to anyone.” Raphael breathed deeply. René knew that he was desperately trying to center himself. “We will free them, I promise you. Do you know who is responsible?” “I recognized two men,” said Raphael, coming aboard the ship beside René. “They were Ignacio Pedro Rodriquez, our local Jesuit priest, and Manuel Hugo Medina, a wealthy landowner, whose property is adjacent to ours. There was another priest with them, unfamiliar to me, along with nine men-at-arms.” By the time they reached the deck, Sheikh Ghassan and his sons were waiting for them. Emile had caught the urgency of the moment and had signaled for James to come aboard the Belle Poulé. “Come, let us go to my cabin.” René led the way to the galley hatch. “Emile, have James join us as soon as he arrives.” “Yes, sir.” Emile turned and shouted to his boatswain. They all filed into René’s cabin and took seats around the large table. Raphael remained standing. Unable to sit, he paced, anger coming from him in waves. His impatience was palpable. James arrived and quietly took a seat. René poured a glass of brandy and handed it to Raphael. He started to wave it away when René spoke, “I am certain your throat is dry, and I am confident we need not be concerned about inebriation.” Raphael’s smile flickered at the inside joke. “All right, tell us from the beginning,” René said. Before Raphael began, the door opened and Akeefa entered. She wore a hijab. She bowed her head. “Father, I believe I will be needed. May I attend?” Abdul Karim pushed his chair back. The sheikh laid a hand on his arm. “Your intuition has served us well in the past, even to the point of saving lives.” The sheikh looked pointedly at Abdul Karim. “There are beloved lives at stake here, and I would be remiss to leave out any weapons or chances for their safe return. Please be seated.” “Raphael,” René prompted. “I was on my way to the ship when I heard musket shots from the direction of the hacienda. I returned to the ridge overlooking our valley in time to see a group of men leading my family from our home. Their hands were tied behind them. They were dragging my father. He appeared to be unconscious but how badly injured, I could not tell. There were a dozen men, including the Jesuit Priest Ignacio Pedro Rodriquez. I also recognized Manuel Hugo Medina, that son of a—” Raphael stopped and glanced at Akeefa. “They put them on horses and rode from the hacienda heading toward me. I hid in the lemon grove, and then followed them after they passed. They have taken my family to La Alcazaba, to the fortress. From the way the other priest was dressed, I would say he was a higher-ranking Jesuit. They will take them to Cordoba, to stand before the auto da fé. “Medina owns the land adjacent to ours. He has been trying to buy or steal our valley for the last twenty years. I am certain he sent lies to the tribunal in Cordoba, in the hopes of seizing our home afterwards. There is no way Ignacio betrayed us. Our priest is a gentle man who has been to our home many times, and I find it impossible to believe he turned us over to the Inquisition.” Raphael paused. “As I live, Medina will never enjoy the fruits of this day.” “When do you think they will be moved from La Alcazaba?” asked René. “There is no way to know. Nor how many men will accompany them. Medina will know I am still free and that I will try to rescue my family. He is wealthy enough to employ many swords to join with the soldiers.” Raphael was clenching and unclenching his right fist as he paced from one side of the cabin to the other. “Your men are sailors. I have no doubt they can fight, but can they fight on horseback? I think not.” “Then we will have to take them while they are still in Malaga,” said James. “They are in La Alcazaba,” said Khalid. “’Tis said to be impregnable,” said Emile. “The impregnable fortress is an illusion, as is everything else our world rests on. The highest mountain will become a plain given enough time and effort. Everything is a function of time and power. With less time, you require more power, and the inverse is true. The proper application of power, however, will also have the effect
 of accomplishing your ends while shortening the amount of time required,” the Maestro said. “If we cannot break into La Alcazaba by force, then we must use guile.” René glanced at the sheikh. “I have an idea which I am loathe to advance, and I ask your forgiveness for even voicing it. Properly dressed, Akeefa can go into the fortress on the pretext of bringing food to one of the prisoners. There she must disable or kill the guards, free the Zaportas, and open the gate to the rest of us.” There was silence in the room. No one spoke, no one moved, no one breathed. A suggestion like that could be interpreted as a vile insult, and there were three men at the table who could respond to that insult. Akeefa stood straighter. Wisely, she chose to be silent. The sheikh glanced at René with tears in his eyes. “Miguel Zaportas is my brother, and I could not sacrifice him for all the honor in this world or the next.” He clasped Akeefa’s hands in his. “Are you willing to risk this, my beloved daughter? You will not be able to take a weapon in with you.” “Beloved Father, have you not taught me that the weapon is not the sword or even the hand that wields it? My life is yours, as it has always been, but I could not live with myself were the Zaportas to be imprisoned, or worse.” She squeezed his hands and turned to Abdul Karim and Khalid. “Beloved brothers, will you also allow me this service? I promise you no man who sees me will live to tell of it.” Not a man seated there had the slightest doubt of her statement. “Is there no other way?” asked Khalid. “Not without an army,” said René. All eyes turned to Abdul Karim. “Forgive me, dear sister, but I can see no other way.” Akeefa’s eyes widened in surprise. “I know I am considered a hidebound traditionalist,” Abdul Karim continued, “determined to hold to every custom, but in truth, my over-protection of you has always stemmed less from any loss of honor than from my love for you and my need to keep you safe.” He failed to meet her eyes. “I am always safe when you are around, elder brother, and I will come through this safely as well.” A gentle smile curved her lips. “I think I know what will be required of me, and we will have a surprise for the men in La Alcazaba.” “All right, then,” René said. “Let us plan this out. James, invite Mister Wade to join our number, and gather the arms we will need. Eight will be enough. Any more than that will arouse suspicion. Emile, prepare both ships for a quick departure and then join us. We will time this so we leave on the afternoon tide.” CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT THEY ENTERED the square through the La Puerta de Atarazanas gate in ones and twos. Akeefa and Khalid headed toward La Alcazaba. She wore a burqa, but was dressed differently underneath. After a loud argument, she and Sabah had taken her only European dress and ripped off all the lace, leaving a pale blue silk sleeveless gown cut very low in the front. She had shortened the gown and then crushed it in her fists so it appeared more worn. Even then, cut and torn, the quality of the cloth would never have been worn by a servant. They dirtied the cloth and cut several rents in it. She tried it on. For a woman raised in the Arab tradition, appearing naked or near-naked in front of anyone other than her husband was punishable by death. She felt naked in the dress. Sabah kept her eyes directed at the floor and finally left the room in tears. Akeefa held out her hand mirror. She had let her hair fall in waves about her shoulders. The revised neckline barely covered her breasts. They had decided she was to pose as a servant bringing food to the Zaportas. She was certain she could convince the guard to take her into the dungeon. The delivery was simple fare, so the guards at the gate were not tempted by it. Khalid escorted her behind a stall close to the La Alcazaba gate and squeezed her hand. In the square, René leaned casually against a pillar thirty feet from the La Alcazaba gate. He smiled reassurance, and his unique mental field surrounded her. Nothing in heaven or hell would prevent him from reaching her, should she encounter difficulty. Taking a deep breath, Akeefa let the burqa drop. With an appearance of confidence she barely felt, Akeefa stepped away from her security and into the sunlit square. She was barefoot, as none of her shoes, or even Sabah’s, would have been reasonable for a servant. Akeefa took the tray of food from Khalid and walked toward the fortress gate. She had seen how European women walked, and given her training and control, she had no trouble mimicking the swaying gait of the prostitutes in the plaza. In the fifty feet she walked toward the fortress every man in the square, and there were many, turned to stare at her. She caught a glimpse of René from the corner of her eye and almost laughed. He had slipped from the pillar he was leaning against and seemed to struggle to remain standing. Then she was at the gate and facing two sour-looking guards who stood complaining in the hot sun. “I have food for the Zaportas who have recently been brought here,” she said, her eyes downcast. The men never looked at the food. She probably could have carried a blunderbuss on the tray. Ordinarily, the guards would have taken the food, and depending on the amount of the bribe offered, considered giving it to the prisoner. In this case, the bribe was carrying the food. “I will take you inside,” said the short fat guard. “I know a nice quiet spot where we can rest along the way.” “I am senior here, and I will be the one to take her inside,” said the taller of the two. For a moment it looked as if they would fight for the privilege, but then the junior guard grumbled and returned to his post. “Señorita.” The senior guard offered his arm. He smiled. His mouth was filled with stained, broken teeth. They walked beneath the portcullis, a huge rusted iron grate that was raised and lowered by winch. From there, they went through a long, narrow tunnel with another portcullis at its end. Murder holes, like evil eyes, were spaced evenly along the tunnel ceiling. Even if René and her brothers got through the portcullis, they would be easy marks for the musketmen above, who would decimate their ranks before they could get to the next gate. If that were lowered, it would trap them within the tunnel. As they walked into the darkness, the portcullis guard put his arm around her, grasping at her breast with his right hand. “Perhaps we might make a little stop before you deliver the food.” His face was close to hers. Her eyes watered as his vile breath swept across her face. Akeefa nimbly danced away from him, maintaining her hold on the tray. She smiled at him and added him to the list of men who would fail to see the sunset. “I can see you are a strong man. I would not mind a detour with you, but I must deliver this food while ’tis hot, or I will be punished and then I will never be able to come back here.” She smiled what she hoped was a seductive smile and leaned forward a little to show more of her breasts. “Perhaps after I come out we can dance a bit.” The guard smirked. “Hurry back, my dove. I will wait for you right here.” She breathed a sigh of relief and continued walking. Soon they passed beneath the second portcullis. If the guards lowered either of the two, she would be trapped within one of the strongest fortresses in Spain. Too late to worry about that now. Before her was a large courtyard surrounded by battlements and a door directly ahead that led into the inner keep. Memorizing the courtyard, she saw another door at the opposite end. Did it lead to the barracks? If so, she did not want to see that door open. “Do not forget, I will be waiting beyond that portcullis.” The guard winked. She counted five men walking along the battlements above. The situation was graver than she thought. They needed a signal for René and the men to begin their assault. All had agreed Akeefa would have to come by a musket or pistol and fire a shot. That would alert the guards above, but there was no helping it. She hoped to have the Zaportas beyond the second portcullis by then. The senior guard banged on the door, and a huge man wearing a dented armor breastplate opened it. “Servant sent with food,” the portcullis guard said gruffly. The giant armored guard stared at her while she focused on the floor. “Who you comin’ for?” “I was sent to bring food for the Zaportas,” she replied meekly, working hard to restrain her anger. “Go back to your post,” the armored guard said. The portcullis guard turned without a word and shuffled back toward the tunnel. Time came to a standstill while the giant surveyed her. He finally nodded for her to follow him. This one seemed unaffected by her attitude and clothes, and that concerned her. He led her through the inner courtyard and keep to an anteroom occupied by three officers, by the cut of their garments. As she entered, she stood straight, smiled, and took a deep breath. They stared at her, speechless. “Servant with food for a guest,” the armored guard said with an evil grin. “Certain you lads can handle it?” The best-dressed man spoke, “Go back to your post.” “Si, Capitán. Are you certain you will not need any help, sir?” His voice was filled with sarcasm. “Vargas, if you do not return to your post immediately, you will find yourself walking the battlements at noon for a week,” the captain barked. Vargas saluted and left the room, closing the door and leaving Akeefa alone with the captain and his men. The hottest part of the day, siesta time, was on them and the head-count was light. The stairs leading down from one end of the room were just ahead. She hoped this was the entrance to the dungeons. “What have we here, señorita?” The captain peeled back the cover over the food. “Nothing special. But this,” he said, leering at Akeefa, “is special.” “May I take the food to
 the Zaportas, sir?” She smiled coyly at him. “I am a little afraid of the dark, and perhaps you might consider taking me to them yourself.” “Rule is we do not go down into the dungeon with fewer than two men.” The captain drew his fingers along his waxed goatee. “I would feel so much safer with two strong men than with just one,” Akeefa said. “Castillo and I will escort the young lady,” the captain said. As the third guard started to protest, he continued, “And you, Lopez, will escort her out.” Lopez grumbled but accepted that between the anteroom and the front gate he would have his turn. Castillo puffed out his chest and crossed the small space to stand beside her. His face was cratered and pitted, a gift of the pox. His smell was overpowering, and this caused her involuntarily to move closer to the captain. Bathing was clearly not an important part of Castillo’s routine. The captain, on the other hand, was a dandy, with his custom uniform and silver buckles. Affecting a rakish smile, he smoothed his long mustachios in anticipation. Akeefa smiled back and brushed against him, checking to see what weapons he carried other than the visible sword and pistol. “This way, señorita.” The captain waved his hand indicating the stairs she had noted earlier. Akeefa paused. “’Tis so dark down there. I fear I might drop the food.” The captain took the tray from her and handed it to Castillo. “Carry this.” He put his arm around her, pulling her closer. “How strong you are.” She linked her arm around his waist. The granite stairs were wide, and the air was dank and wet. Their footsteps echoed from the walls. The captain had taken a torch from the anteroom, and the light from the fire reflected spots of algae growing on the wall. Akeefa counted the steps. Twelve, thirteen, fourteen… At twenty-five steps the ground leveled out, becoming a narrow tunnel that opened into a huge cavern, dimly lit by torches. Iron cages were aligned in rows as well as tunnel openings in the walls that apparently led to other dungeons. “They are not expected to stay long, which is why they remain on this level,” said the captain. This level! How deep into the earth did the dungeons go? Most of the cells were empty, but some held what had once been men. Those that could move came to the cell bars and extended their hands. “Water, por favor.” Castillo banged the tray against one man’s hands. “Shut up.” “Where are the Zaportas?” she asked. “Over that way.” The captain nodded to his left. “Then why are we going this way?” “I thought we might get to know each other better,” he said laughing. “I would love to get to know you better, but this food is cooling by the minute, and it will make me so sad if I cannot give it to them at least warm. I am not much fun when I am sad.” “Me either,” laughed Castillo. “The last thing we want is for you to be sad, right Castillo?” “The very last thing,” said Castillo. The captain turned around, and they headed in the opposite direction. Soon they were in front of the cell that held the Zaportas. The captain took the torch and held it close to the cell. Señor Zaportas was lying on the ground. Rebeca tended him while Raquel hovered over him. “’Tis me, Maria. Carmen sent me to you with something to eat.” Akeefa hoped they understood and did not call her by her real name. “These kind men have brought me here.” Castillo opened the cell with a key from a large chain. Akeefa went in and placed the tray on the ground, then embraced Rebeca and Raquel. “The Señor?” she asked. “Will he live?” “I do not know. They have not allowed us a doctor, Maria,” she said loud enough to be heard by the guards. Then softer, “You should not have come here, dear. There is nothing to be done for us, and you have put yourself in great danger.” “We shall see.” Akeefa hugged Rebeca again. “Be of good cheer. I will return.” Then speaking louder, “I will return with more food as often as I am able, my lady. Take heart, as I am certain this awful situation will be resolved soon.” “Gracias, Maria,” said Rebeca as the man closed and locked the cell. “This way, señorita.” The captain took her arm. “We hope you are not too sad. Right, Castillo?” “We surely do,” Castillo said, his smirk illuminated in the flames. They led her over to a deserted corner and put the torch into a holder on the wall. Castillo was already loosening his breeches. “Let me see what you have.” The captain spun her around to face him. He raised his hand to pull the gown off her shoulder. She reached down, pulled his sword from his scabbard, danced away two paces, and stepped forward again. As she did so, she extended the tip of the sword. It slid a precise three inches into his chest, through his ribs, and killed him instantly. Withdrawing the sword, she turned to Castillo and smiled. He stood frozen, staring at the captain crumpled on the ground. The sword made a swishing sound as it cut through the air, and then Castillo was dying. Blood poured from his open throat. “I am not sad at all now.” Akeefa leaned over and took the key ring from the man’s hand. She pulled the pistol from the captain’s belt, and checked to make certain it was loaded. That was everything she needed. There was no way for her to know whether a new or larger shift of men waited above, but she had no time to worry about that now. Akeefa returned to the Zaportas’s cell and opened the gate. She hugged Rebeca and a sobbing Raquel. “It will be more difficult having to carry Señor Zaportas, but we will do this.” “Si,” said Rebeca. “Raquel, I need you to be stronger than you think you are. Your father needs your help, as do I.” “I will do what is necessary.” The young woman took a deep breath and stilled her tears. “We must carry Señor Zaportas out.” Akeefa tucked the pistol and sword through the sash around her waist. She picked him up, holding him under the arms, while the other two women lifted his legs. Fortunately, Miguel Zaportas was not a large man, but it still took all three to carry him. They managed to carry him to the stairs, only resting twice briefly along the way. They gently lowered him to the ground. “There is no way we will be able to lift him up those stairs,” said Rebeca, gasping for breath. “I agree,” Akeefa thought hard and came to an unhappy decision. “There is nothing for it. We must leave Señor Zaportas here for the men to carry.” “Akeefa, I will not leave my husband. Take Raquel and whatever happens, happens.” Rebeca hugged Akeefa again. “Know I love you for what you tried to do.” “Mother, I will stay as well.” Raquel said quietly. “There is nothing I can do to aid Akeefa. I will only be in her way. We will live together or not, as God wills.” Before Rebeca could protest, Akeefa spoke. “Beloved second mother, I am afraid she is right. Having to protect her will diminish my options when I get above. As she says, we will all live together or not, as Allah wills.” Rebeca bowed her head in acquiescence. “Come, let us move him over there, out of the way of the opening,” Akeefa said. They shifted Miguel once more. Rebeca brushed her hand along Akeefa’s cheek and then Akeefa was moving toward the stairs. She paused in the middle of the stairway to center herself, bringing her body and all of her faculties under control. She hoped there was only one man in the room above, but she would accept whatever fate had written. She came up silently into the shadow of the opening, her sword in front of her. Lopez was the room’s only occupant. He died before he knew she was there. Now comes the hard part, crossing the courtyard. She had a plan. Further ripping open her bodice, she revealed more of her breasts, then tore cloth from her right shoulder, and prayed Allah was looking the other way. As much as she wanted the sword, she forced herself to leave it behind. If she was to convince the soldiers she was a frightened girl, she could take only the pistol. But she did take the eating knife from the dead man’s hand. Then she drew the pistol from her sash, and checked that it was primed. Pulling the hammer back to its cocked position, she paused and collected herself. With a deep breath, Akeefa opened the door, and rushed through the deserted inner keep into the courtyard. She slowed and came to a stop in the center. As she hoped, Vargas, the armored man who had escorted her earlier, strode to meet her, a vicious sneer on his face. She glanced up at the men on the battlements who turned to watch. They saw her and raced for the courtyard stairs. Obviously her rape was not something to watch from a distance. You wanted a chance to signal René and your brothers. Now would be a good time. Akeefa aimed the pistol at Vargas, doing her best to imitate a frightened, helpless young woman, including waving her arm around. The pistol did not concern him in the slightest. She fired, taking care to miss wildly. She glanced up at the battlements and was relieved to see all of the men had come down into the courtyard. Now it was all down to René arriving before she got into trouble. In the next instant, Vargas had reached her. She turned aside, but he managed to grab her shoulder, pulling the bodice completely off. For his size, he was much faster than she expected. Akeefa danced away from him, barely avoiding his grasp. The leering faces of the other guards surrounded her. The huge man lunged for her again, and once again, she eluded him to the shouts and jeers of the other soldiers. He paused, breathing heavily. “You might as well stop running. There is nowhere for you to run. So relax, little minx.” One of the men yelled, “Vargas, what the hell do you care about the woman? You do not even like women.” “No, but you do, and once I get a hold of her, it will cost you.” Vargas smiled as he circled Akeefa. “Come on, little lady, I am not going to hurt you—much.” René burst through the portcullis at a dead run, followed by Raphael,
 her father and brothers. Emile, James, and Gavin Wade were not to be seen. Hopefully they had dispatched the two soldiers stationed at the entrance by luring them into the tunnel and now guarded the outer portcullis gate. René moved toward the armored man, but Akeefa yelled at him, “No, he is mine.” She faced Vargas and dropped her impersonation of a helpless girl. Discarding the useless pistol, she pulled the small knife from her sash and waited. Vargas stopped. Something had changed. His expression shouted imminent threat, but it was obvious by the growing confusion on his face that he had failed to locate its source. The courtyard continued to fill with soldiers jeering at him and then at the half-dressed girl. Like a maddened bull, he shook his head, drew his sword, and charged Akeefa. As he rushed her, she swayed aside to avoid his thrust and smoothly drew the sharp knife under his ear, slicing the artery cleanly. He dropped to the ground choking, disbelief written across his face. “That did not hurt much, did it?” she asked. When she looked up from the dead man, her father, brothers, René, and Raphael had surrounded her. She tried to pull her dress around her, and realized the futility of it. “The Zaportas are through the anteroom, at the foot of the dungeon stairs. Señor Zaportas is unconscious.” René pulled his shirt off and put it around her. “Khalid, Akeefa, stay here with your father and guard our retreat. Raphael, Abdul Karim, come with me.” The three men headed for the dungeons. Akeefa pulled René’s shirt over herself and then retrieved Vargas’s sword. The guards that had come down from the battlements milled around in confusion after witnessing Vargas’ death at the hands of this slip of a girl. Such a thing was patently impossible. Perhaps it was the timing, or the sound of the pistol, but her attention was drawn to the creak of the barracks door as it opened. The sleepy soldier returning to duty paused for a few seconds while his mind made sense of the scene. He turned and yelled, and soldiers began to erupt from the doorway. “We need to move closer to the barracks to maintain a line of retreat for René and the Zaportas,” said her father. The three of them raced forward to engage the new arrivals. What the soldiers saw was an old man, a young man, and a girl. There was no way they could be prepared for the ferocity that met them in the middle of the courtyard. The three formed a circle with a deadly barrier of steel around its circumference. In reality, it was only minutes before René, Abdul Karim, and the Zaportas were out of the door and heading toward the second portcullis, but it felt like hours. Abdul Karim had Miguel over his left shoulder. He moved easily, as if the dead weight of a man was nothing. He stopped. His intense expression shouted his desire to join the fight. “Get the Zaportas family back to the ship,” yelled René as he joined Akeefa. “We are right behind you.” With the addition of René, the tide changed, even though there were at least twenty men in the courtyard with more coming through the doorway. Within minutes, the soldiers struggled to fight their way back through that door. Akeefa turned to watch René, fascinated. In that instant, she knew and accepted she would never equal him in this lifetime, let alone surpass him. The thought, which would previously have angered her so, now gave her a warm feeling of pride in his attainment. “Fall back!” René yelled over the din. “’Tis time to leave.” As the soldiers continued their retreat, the four of them dashed through the gate and into the tunnel. Akeefa hoped they got through it before the soldiers regained the battlements. “Keep going,” René yelled as he stopped in front of the inner portcullis. The rope that held it up was inside the courtyard. Taking out a razor-sharp throwing knife, he sliced through most of its width. Their panic already subsiding, the soldiers gathered to rush the gate again. A musket discharged, blowing a piece of mortar from the wall beside René. He moved just inside the portcullis and threw his knife. It flew true, severing the remaining strands of rope. The iron grate crashed to the ground with an explosive thud. René turned and ran to catch up with the others. Fortunately, none of the soldiers had remained on the battlements above. Unscathed, René rejoined Akeefa at the first portcullis where they met Emile, James, and Gavin, who were on their way back into the fortress to retrieve them. “Good afternoon, Mister Wade.” René grinned. “Top of the afternoon to you, Cap’n.” “I think I have done all the sightseeing I care to. What say we return to the ship? ’Tis a fine day for a sail.” The group headed for the La Puerta de Atarazanas gate and the open sea. As they approached the boarding plank to the Belle Poulé, René turned to James. “I am sorry we never managed to see the gardens. I know how much you were looking forward to it.” “Maybe next time,” James said, trying to catch his breath and laugh at the same time. Once on board the ships, Emile and James gave their commands to cast off. The ships raised sail and moved out smartly on the afternoon tide. From the rail of the Belle Poulé, René saw the soldiers boiling out of La Alcazaba like red and yellow hornets from a disturbed nest. One threat remained. The fortress would turn its great cannon on them. Their escape depended on how quickly the soldiers readied the cannon to fire—and how accurate they were. “Mister Lamert, signal Mister Bailey to take an evasive course and then settle on south by southwest,” René said. “If we become separated, we will rendezvous off Mijas before making the run through Gibraltar.” “Aye, aye, sir.” Emile went to the rail to shout René’s orders to the Seahawk, the ships still being close enough for communication. Raphael walked up to René. “May I have a moment of your time?” “Of course. Things have changed a bit now that your family is aboard. You may choose to be a passenger or crew. Either way, we can remain informal in private. How is your family?” “My father has not yet regained consciousness, but Doctor Al Zahrawi assures me the signs are good he will. My mother and sister are shaken but in good health. You have saved my family from certain death. While I may never be able to repay you, I will spend this lifetime trying.” The Raphael who stood before René was a different man. “We did what was necessary. All of us. Akeefa is the one who saved your family.” “Akeefa is already my sister, and she knows I would gladly give my life for her. I find I must ask yet another favor of you.” “You have but to ask, you know that.” “Put me ashore near our hacienda. I have business to conduct, and I will not leave Spain without completing it.” “I will go with you,” René answered, knowing exactly what business Raphael proposed. “No, René, this must be done by me alone. I will not take long, or I will not return. Twelve hours is what I ask. Take me in by longboat, and return in twelve hours to pick me up. If I am not there, you are to leave. Do not look for me.” Raphael met René’s eyes. “I want your word you will not seek me out if I fail. The rendezvous will occur in twelve hours, or not at all.” “Think, Raphael. You are allowing your emotions to govern your actions. Allow me to accompany you. I promise I will not act unless the situation requires it. Your family has been attacked. Your objective is to remove the threat and the possibility of any future threat, not satisfy your inability to protect your family from a dozen men.” “What would you have done in the same situation?” René paused in thought. “In truth, if the incident had occurred before my sojourn in a slave hold, I might have charged ahead and paid with my life for my stupidity. Even with training, our emotions can carry us to our disadvantage. Let me act as a reserve force. No general with an ounce of strategic intelligence commits his whole force without knowledge of the enemy. Act with power but not in thrall to ignorance.” “You will not interfere unless I ask.” “Raphael—“ “Your word, sir.” There was silence for a beat before René spoke, “You have it. I will not act unless you request it.” “Nevertheless,” Raphael said with a fleeting smile, “If we both have underestimated the enemy, you will leave me and take my family to safety.” “I will, and you have my word on that as well.” “Gracias.” Raphael extended his right hand, and the two men clasped hands. “Mister Lamert,” René called out to the big seaman. “Change course to west by southwest up the coast three leagues. Be on the lookout for the Zaportas dock.” “Aye, aye, sir,” Emile called back. CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE THE BELLE Poulé dropped anchor a mile above the Zaportas plantation later that afternoon. The grounds extended to the sea, and while there was a protected quay and dock, René had directed the crew to bypass it for the less conspicuous anchorage. A cool wind blew across the deck, and the sun melted the horizon crimson with the promise of good weather. Raphael said his goodbyes to a tearful mother and sister and asked them to remain with their father in the cabin. René, Emile, and Gavin Wade accompanied Raphael in the longboat to shore. “Are you certain you will not consider a couple more companions?” asked Emile. Raphael met the big captain’s gaze. “I am certain, Monsieur Lamert. René will accompany me and that will have to be sufficient. Gracias for your offer.” The boat touched the sandy beach, and they jumped out to pull it to shore. “Bon chance,” Emile said. René clasped his hand. “We will return. There is much left to do in this lifetime.” With that, he and Raphael disappeared into the forest that skirted the beach. Raphael and René avoided the road from the dock to the sorting house and went through the citrus groves instead. “Medina will not wait even one day to install himself as the new owner of the hacienda.”
 Raphael trampled the tall grass between the rows of trees as if it were his enemy. “Control your anger.” René ducked under a low branch. “You are better trained than that.” Raphael nodded and held up his right hand. They silently approached the hacienda and counted five horses in front of the veranda. Raphael led René to an unremarkable copse of buckthorn bushes. “My ancestors survived many narrow escapes over the centuries. My father engineered an underground tunnel connected with the hacienda in three locations. This one will come out in the root cellar, an unlikely place to meet intruders.” Raphael pushed aside the bushes planted around the doorway, then he brushed away the earth and pulled open the wooden door into the tunnel. Once within, he lit the torch placed there for such contingencies. René stooped and then followed along until they were standing on the other side of the root cellar door. A long moment of listening revealed only silence. Raphael released a hidden latch and soundlessly pulled the door open. He then slipped into the cellar, followed by René, who closed the door behind them. “I have a good idea where Manuel Medina can be found,” whispered Raphael. “I only hope that Carmen has remained in the kitchen and that he has not hurt her.” When they got to the kitchen the room was empty and cold. Raphael leaned into René. “Medina will have brought men to ransack the house for valuables. No matter what, Medina must not escape.” René nodded. Raphael’s plan was exactly what René would have done had it been his home being looted. They entered the great room through the dining room. Raphael pointed to Medina seated in his father’s chair. That magnificent room, and that chair, embodied the power and respect accorded Señor Zaportas. Earlier, Raphael had explained how Medina had spent years without success trying to purchase or cajole acceptance into the small circle of intimates who found welcome at the Zaportas’ hacienda. Raphael moved up behind the chair. He aimed his pistol at the back of Medina’s neck. “Get the hell out of my father’s chair.” Medina jumped as though branded with a cattle iron. He swiveled around and reached for the pistol in his belt. “Do not prove your stupidity,” said Raphael. René moved into the room to stand a distance behind Raphael and to his right. His sword was drawn. Medina lowered his hand to his side. His gaze touched on René and then focused on Raphael. “Drop the pistol to the floor, butt-first,” Raphael ordered. “It was not me,” Medina whined. “It was the priest, I had no choice. He came to me and threatened my eternal soul.” “Move away from my father’s chair.” “I tried to protect Miguel.” “Move, or I will kill you where you stand.” Raphael waved his pistol toward the center of the room. “Draw your sword. My mother will be furious if I stain her carpet, but every breath you take is offensive to me.” Medina’s demeanor changed when he realized that Raphael was not going to just kill him out of hand, and he added a swagger to his movement. “You Jews thought you could get away with it. I own this land now.” “No, you do not.” Raphael drew his sword and put the pistol down on a side table. “You never could best my father, and you have failed once more. He had prepared for our move and sold the land, and the hacienda, six months ago. We leased it. No matter what happens, our home is beyond your grasp.” “The bastard.” Medina charged Raphael. “Life is so unfair sometimes,” Raphael said as the swords clanged together. The man’s guard was sloppy, and Raphael slashed his blade through Medina’s cheek. Medina shrieked and disengaged as he stumbled backwards. “Por favor, I will give you money, much money. And I will talk with the Jesuit on your behalf. He is a reasonable man. I will tell him it was all a big mistake.” “Yours.” Raphael advanced. “Is there a problem, Señor Medina?” a man’s voice asked from behind them. “You want me to shoot him?” Time stopped for what seemed an eternity. “Drop the sword, son, and I will not hurt you.” Medina’s lips curled into a cruel smile. “I have an inquisitor you need to meet. But do not count on him not hurting you.” Raphael leaned forward for a last lunge toward Medina as René prepared to charge the man behind them. A loud musical thud rang out. René turned in time to see the man behind him crumple to the floor. “Take care of that other weasel.” Carmen had one hand braced on her hip and the other wrapped around the handle of a cast iron frying pan. René glanced back at Medina. The man tried to claim the advantage of the distraction with a quick thrust at Raphael. Raphael, however, refused to be distracted twice. Manuel Medina died an instant later, his heart skewered by Raphael’s sword. Raphael wiped the blade on the dead man’s shirt and then sheathed his sword. In quick strides he was at Carmen’s side hugging her. “Enough of that.” Tears spilled onto her wrinkled cheeks. “There are others in the house.” As Raphael made for the doorway she said, “Wait. Your mother and father and sister—” Raphael interrupted her. “Safe aboard the Belle Poulé, which is where you will be shortly. Now we must greet the rest of our visitors.” “What are you going to do?” she asked. “Since they are not invited guests, I see no reason to be polite,” he said with an evil grin. René helped Raphael drag the last corpse out of the house and push it off the veranda into the dirt. He and Raphael made a pile of them with Medina on the bottom. It was a shame the new owner, Juan Alvarez Ramos, would have to clean this up, but every hour the Zaportas family remained within the Inquisition’s reach, the danger of apprehension increased. René followed Raphael back into the hacienda to help him gather the household’s portable wealth, and any items of historical value to the family. Raphael summoned the servants into the courtyard. He gave each one more than enough money to relocate if they wished, advised them to leave the area for a time, and to contact Señor Ramos if major problems arose. Raphael began to hitch horses to a produce wagon when the retainers rushed over and grabbed the harness. “Por favor, stop.” Raphael held up his right hand palm out. “When they ask if you helped me, I want you to be able to say no and have it be the truth. You can say you saw me, but I was armed and there was nothing you could do. Raphael reached for the horse collar the man held. “Francisco, por favor. I do not want you implicated any more than you already are.” From his previous visit, René recognized the man as the fore-man of the Zaportas hacienda, Francisco Barba. The others stopped. Francisco refused to relinquish the horse collar. “Carmen told us that Señor Zaportas, your mother, and your sister are safe. That is all we need to know. When they question us, they will not believe us whatever we say, and so we will say nothing. We know you cannot take us with you, so we will wait for your return, or perhaps the return of your children. All we ask, señor, is that you allow us this last service.” A lone tear inched along Raphael’s cheek. These people were his family. He was running away, but he had no choice. Death waited for him, for them all, if they stayed. Raphael glanced at Francisco and the others. “On my life, we will return as soon as we are able. Francisco, Pedro, will you hitch up the wagon?” Raphael’s voice was rough. He cleared his throat and took a deep breath. “Carlos, Daniel, help René and me load the wagon. The rest of you can help Carmen pack whatever she wants to take. I hope we will not need another wagon.” The servants laughed. He paused, and gazed at the foreman. “Gracias, mi amigo.” Francisco nodded and placed the collar he held on one of the horses. With the aid of the retainers, Raphael and René were able to pack most of the things the Zaportas needed. They had to add a second wagon, which was soon filled. Apparently Carmen was determined to dismantle her entire kitchen and move it aboard ship. After some heated discussion, with René’s support, they were finally able to convince Carmen that more would be impossible to transport. The spices alone would tax the longboat. The time had come to leave. Raphael shook hands with the men and hugged the women goodbye. From where he sat at the head of one of the wagons, René followed Raphael’s gaze back to the servants. Their tear streaked faces were reflected in the light of the torches they held. The beginnings of a gray dawn appeared on the horizon. Raphael breathed in deeply, as if to commit to memory the smell of the citrus groves in the early morning. He climbed up to sit beside Carmen and gathered the reins. He nodded to René and then snapped the reins out over the horse’s backs. “Arre!” CHAPTER FORTY Château Gaspard, Bordeaux, France WOOD STRUCK stone, and a man cursed. “If I am jarred again, you will take up residence here,” growled Horemheb, through the guttural remains of Victor’s vocal cords. His chair was carried by four brawny men. Like the royal chair of a pharaoh, stout poles on each side supported it. An ungainly way to descend stairs, but it was possible if the bearers turned sideways. The men carried him to the occupied cell while a fifth man opened the locked grate. In the center of the cell, a raised pedestal of stone was outfitted with various sizes of iron rings. The men lowered the chair beside the pedestal. The château’s dungeon reminded Horemheb of the cells filled during his early days as Pharaoh. The walls, twelve feet thick, allowed no sound to escape the space, but from within, each of the large iron-barred cells permitted its inhabitants to see and hear what awaited them in the fullness of time. There were six cells, three on each side, separated by paths which allowed no physical contact between prisoners. Torches could be placed around the circumference of the room when light was required. The work done
 within sometimes required the same levels of light a surgeon might ask for, but ordinarily a lone torch provided adequate illumination for the ministrations performed. Today, there was but a single occupant chained to the wall of one of the cells. His expression was a wash of terror. “Strip the prisoner and secure him here beside me,” Horemheb said. “Oui, monsieur,” said the fifth man. They unlocked the metal collar around the prisoner’s neck from the wall, stripped his ragged clothing from him, and then dragged him to the center of the cell. Two men secured his collar to a ring set into the granite pedestal while the others secured his arms and legs. The prisoner pleaded. “I can kill the boy. ’Twas not my fault. I can still be of use.” “In that you are correct.” Horemheb faced the terrified servants. “Leave us. I will call when I am ready for you.” The men needed no urging to hurry from the oubliette. “It has been a long time since I have done this, and I apologize if my skills are rusty.” Horemheb grasped the metal collar and then pulled the prisoner’s head toward him. The man rattled the cuffs securing his limbs to the pedestal and gibbered in fear. “You see, I need your life force. I intend to remain in this pathetic boy’s husk, and in this, yes, you can be of use. You will find this unpleasant. In fact, it will be the most painful thing you can imagine.” He stroked the man’s head, and a pale violet glow became visible. Horemheb leaned over, closed his eyes, and began to absorb the glowing energy. The man’s scalp blackened and crisped as if in a fire, darkening with each draw of his life force. Well-versed in the application of pain though they were, the fools waiting at the top of the stairs had never before heard a human make sounds as terrible as these. CHAPTER FORTY-ONE Off the coast of Spain AFTER MEETING the Seahawk off Mijas, the Belle Poulé and her companion made their way toward the Strait of Gibraltar. The weather was even, and the winds fair. The most dangerous part would come when the width of the strait narrowed to fewer than three leagues. At present, the ships were about a thousand yards apart and had managed, with the assistance of lamps, to remain within visual distance through the nights as well. It was early evening, and René had finished supervising fencing practice. He was wiping his face when Dr. Zahrawi came up from below. He walked over to him. “How is Señor Zaportas, doctor? Any change?” “He remains unconscious.” The doctor took in a deep breath of fresh sea air. “Is there nothing more that can be done for him?” “In my experience, no. He will either awaken or not. I have instructed Señora Zaportas and the family to remain with him, to talk to him, and to remind him his work here is not done.” “Would I be intruding if I visited?” “Not at all. I am certain they would welcome a diversion. To sit a vigil with someone you love is hard work.” “Merci, doctor.” René nodded and then headed toward the galley hatch. He stopped by his cabin first. A few minutes later he continued on to the Zaportas’ cabin. René stood outside the cabin door and listened for conversation. The last thing he wanted to do was to wake someone. Hearing voices, he knocked. “Enter,” said Rebeca. René opened the door and stepped across the threshold. “Oh, ’tis you, René,” Rebeca said with a tired smile. “I never did get to properly thank you. Come here.” René crossed the cabin to stand before the señora. She wrapped her arms around him and hugged him then kissed him on the cheek. “Gracias, my dear man, for saving my family.” “As I told Raphael,” he said, looking at Raphael, who smiled and shrugged. “Akeefa is the one who took all the risk. I just came along.” “I know what Akeefa did, and I know what it cost Ammar, Abdul Karim, and Khalid for her to do it. You, however, were instrumental in bringing together the means of our survival, and I am grateful.” She stepped back. “What is that you have in your hand?” “A lute I bought in Malaga. I thought perhaps Señor Zaportas might enjoy some music.” René grinned. “Be assured I use that term loosely.” “We would love some music. Mother?” Raquel perked up for the first time since they boarded the ship. “That would be lovely, René.” Rebeca changed seats to sit closer to Raphael. “Raquel, give René your chair and sit on the bed beside your father.” René sat in the offered chair and tuned the lute. He was a little self-conscious, as he had not practiced, let alone played, for quite a while. He hoped it was something that stayed with you. All he knew were French folk songs. Marie, their cook, used to sing them to him until he echoed them back to her. Most were bawdy and inappropriate for the time and place, but there were a few that sang of beautiful things such as the ocean, wine, and children playing. He would begin with “Glory of the Sea,” one of Marie’s favorites. The old Irish sea chantey had been translated into French. It told the story of a selkie, a magical being who changed form from a woman to a seal and back again until she met her true love. Then she would remain in the form of that love, be it seal or human, never returning to the joys of the other. He began to play quietly and then to sing along. He had a clear baritone that was pleasing to the ear. People always seemed surprised by that, and he had no idea why. Akeefa and Khalid entered the cabin and stood just inside the doorway. The music of the song was repetitive and lyrical, and René always found it had a soothing effect on him. He sensed it had the same effect on the others as well. The song took him back to his summers aboard the Belle Poulé, when Jacques would call to him to sing. The men would clear a space for him, and then crowd around, hungry for something to break the monotony, or perhaps something to remind them of the distant land. Singing had gotten him out of many a dreary task aboard ship. He smiled at the memory. He was just getting to his favorite verse when Raquel cried out. “He gripped my hand,” she said. “I was holding his hand, and I felt him squeeze mine.” Rebeca rushed to her husband’s side and took his hand from Raquel. “My beloved, por favor, come back to us.” Slowly, Miguel blinked his eyes open and breathed more deeply. Consciousness dawned. “Rebeca?” he said, struggling to speak. “Miguel.” Tears streamed from her eyes. She fell forward to embrace him. “Oh, Miguel.” Señor Zaportas caught René’s eye. “You are aboard the Belle Poulé, and all of your family is safe,” René said, and then turned to Akeefa and Khalid. “We should give them some privacy. I will notify Doctor Zahrawi that Señor Zaportas is awake.” They left the cabin and closed the door behind them. As they climbed the stairway to the upper deck, René could not help but stare. Akeefa was not wearing her

Baker, Elliott. The Sun God's Heir: Return Book One (Kindle Locations 2711-4774). Hypatia Press. Kindle Edition. 

customary hijab. Her hair shimmered in black waves on her shoulders. He pushed open the hatch, and they exited into a calm, starry evening. The doctor was forward checking a sailor with a bandage on his wrist. René turned to Akeefa and Khalid. “You two go over to the aft rail. I will join you after I speak with Dr. Zahrawi.” “See, he did not even notice,” Akeefa said to Khalid. “Oh, he noticed, all right. He is too polite to speak of it.” “I will not remain covered while other women aboard—whom we love and respect—breathe the air freely without a burqa in front of their noses,” she said, her frustration long-earned. “I know, I know.” As they arrived at the rail, the moon-glazed ocean stretched out in front of them. “I was there during the conversation with father and Abdul Karim, remember? Your arguments were persuasive and forceful, and both bowed to your courage in the fortress and to your will. I will do my best, beloved sister. There is logic and there is heart, and the heart does not give up its learning easily. Our society teaches the male his purpose is to protect the female so she may continue and increase the family. And I know it gives us a puffed up self-image, which we tend to magnify at times—” “At times?” huffed Akeefa. “All right, most of the time.” Khalid inspected the deck. “And though the thought of needing to protect you is ludicrous, the question remains. If protecting the female is not the primary role of the male, what is? Do we have a purpose at all? And how are we to face the world without a purpose?” “I see your point, and I will not even pretend I am powerful enough to exist alone, so your purpose remains. Still, there are times, like now, when the chances of my beauty driving one of the sailors to accost me are slim, even were I not able to defend myself. You should try walking around on a hot day with your face and head covered.” “I expect it is uncomfortable.” “That is an understatement. I have promised to tailor my wardrobe to meet the demands of the society I am within. When we reach home, you may rest assured I will once again be properly covered.” René walked up to them and paused as though he sensed their discord. “I have notified Dr. Zahrawi, so we will wait to hear what he says. He has told me before that if a man wakes, there is a good chance he will recover.” The contentious atmosphere cleared, and there was a pleasant silence. “Well, I will bid both of you good night as I have reading to do. Father believes an ocean voyage is the perfect time to study.” Khalid nodded to René and flashed a smile at his sister. “He is a good man,” said René as Khalid walked toward the galley hatch. “One of the best,” she agreed. “There are a number of good men aboard this vessel.” She glanced out over the moonlit sea. “I noticed you changed your wardrobe.” “Do you approve?” “Very much. I cannot think ’tis comfortable wearing a mask all the time. Ah, I am sorry, I did not mean that the way it sounded. I think you look fine however you dress,” he added lamely. Akeefa laughed at his discomfort. “René, you do not have to mince words with me. There is always a risk of offending someone, and in my case, it might be more dangerous than most, but I appreciate your honesty.” “I never liked the thought of being a courtier, fawning over people with power, but your father has taught me that words can be either a weapon or a tool, and like a sword, they need to be properly utilized.” “Father has always been rather insistent on our studying,” she laughed. “I have my own course of study, but over the years I have been able to adjust it now and then toward those subjects that interest me.” The ship’s wake bubbled up white and silver, leaving an iridescent streak on the ocean. “’Tis so beautiful out here. Peaceful.” “It is now, but the sea has many faces. Probably why ’tis so fascinating. Look how smartly the Seahawk moves.” He pointed toward the other ship. “She is only using three quarters the sail we are, so she can keep her distance.” A smile tweaked Akeefa’s lips as René unwittingly changed the subject. CHAPTER FORTY-TWO THERE WAS a knock on the cabin door. “Enter,” said Miguel, seated at the desk. Sheikh Ghassan came in carrying a small cloth bag and closed the door behind him. “I thought you were supposed to stay in bed and recuperate,” he said and then nodded to René who had been visiting Miguel. “I am fine. ’Twill take more than a gun-butt to the head to take me from the board.” Miguel pushed his chair back. “Stay seated.” The sheikh walked over to shake hands. René rose from his chair and then sat on the bunk. The sheikh pulled the chair up across from the desk. He placed the cloth bag he carried on the desktop. “’Tis good to see you, Ammar.” Miguel smiled. “And good to see you still boss people around.” “Only when they are too stubborn for their own good,” said the sheikh. “Rebeca fusses about me like an old hen, and Raquel is worse. ’Tis galling to be an invalid.” Miguel did not attempt to hide his frustration. “I know I came close to leaving and that frightened them, but damn it, I am still here so be done already. What have you in the bag?” “Well, if things have followed true to form, the only thing you have had to drink has been goat’s milk and water, correct?” The sheikh slipped a bottle of brandy out of the sack. “I have so missed getting into trouble with you, old friend. There are glasses in the cupboard over there. René will you get them? Let us not waste time talking. Let me see what you brought.” Miguel took the bottle. “This will do nicely.” René brought over three glasses and placed them on the desk. The sheikh poured brandy into each. He handed one to Miguel, a second to René, and took the last glass for himself. He raised his glass. “L’Chaim!” Miguel clinked his glass against the sheikh’s and, meeting his eye, echoed the toast. “To life!” Miguel glanced at René, then back to Sheikh Ghassan. Neither spoke. René sensed his presence was an intrusion. He set his empty glass on the desk and walked to the door. “Gentlemen, I must return to my duties.” “Sit, René,” said the sheikh who looked at Miguel and received a nod in return. “You are an integral part of our plans and I would not exclude you from any discussions of the future. Aboard ship, however, is not the place or the time to answer the myriad of questions which must arise from entering into our current discussion. If we sound cryptic in our deliberations, it is as it must be, for you are yet to be initiated. Are you willing to sit quietly and restrain any questions until we judge the time to be proper to answer them?” “If you feel it wise for me to remain, I am willing. When you desire, I will be happy to leave you to your considerations and will find the patience to await answers in their own time.” René met the gaze of each man. “May we dispense with the recognition ritual and consider ourselves to have recognized each other in proper fashion?” said Miguel. “We may,” answered the sheikh. “I would recognize the signature of your vital energy anywhere, my friend. There are not many of us. Your near-departure is, and should be, a matter for grave consideration. I believe you misjudged the climate within your country, and it was only by good fortune you and your family are still with us.” “As much as I am embarrassed to admit it, I believe you are correct. I allowed the land to enter my heart to such an extent that I was unable to consider leaving it, even though I knew it was time to go. I am angry at my blindness.” “Our mission has not been compromised.” The sheikh stood and paced, apparently too filled with excitement to remain seated. “We will proceed with the initiation once we reach Meknes. You concur?” “I agree. Are there any of our brothers or sisters in Morocco or reasonably nearby?” Miguel asked. “At least one, but we will know when we reach land.” “We will have our work cut out for us, I am afraid. Moulay Ismail’s patience for his brother’s throne has limits.” Miguel sipped his brandy. “Battle plans never survive the first strike. We are at once stronger and weaker than we anticipated. But enough of this for now. If I overtax you, Rebeca will turn her attentions to me.” The sheikh stood. “René, let us take our leave.” “But René was sharing his plans for our proposed trading venture. Surely I can continue with that conversation.” “There will be plenty of time tomorrow for business. Rest well my old friend.” “I will check in on you tomorrow,” said René who made his way toward the door. “Make sure you bring the manifest.” “I will.” René left the cabin, but heard the two old friends last comments. “He is the one in this generation,” said Miguel. “I am sure of it,” said the sheikh. CHAPTER FORTY-THREE ’TWAS A fine afternoon for a party. The sea was calm, and even though it was winter, the trade winds off the coast of Africa kept the temperature reasonable. The Seahawk rested alongside the Belle Poulé, and James and the first group of sailors had come aboard. There was plenty to eat, and while there was drink, René had limited the strength of the punch. They were still in enemy waters, after all. The men had drawn lots, the losers taking the first watch and then exchanging after two hours. They still had three days’ sail before reaching safe harbor in Larache where they would offload the weapons. Mister Downs and Sabah had worked with Carmen to create a truly memorable feast. The savory food filled a long trencher table set up on the Poulé’s deck. René played and sang until he exhausted his repertoire of songs. One of the men from the Seahawk took over, playing a squeezebox that set the crew dancing aboard both ships. As the afternoon wound down, René sat talking with Señora Zaportas. When she turned to answer a question from the sheikh, he leaned back, pleasantly full, contented. A gust of wind came across the deck, ruffling Akeefa’s
 shawl, which she had left draped over the back of a chair. The temperature on the ocean often changed precipitously, as now, with a chill on the breeze. René picked up the shawl, then took it over to where she stood at the rail, gazing toward the sunset. She had been pensive during the afternoon. René sensed an unusual level of worry radiating from her. He placed the shawl around her shoulders. “Thank you, René.” She continued to stare at the sun reflecting off the waves. “You are quiet tonight.” “I am happy Raquel got the party you promised her.” “I have seen you happy, and this is nothing like my re-collections.” He put one hand on his chest and the other before him like an actor might and grimaced. She laughed and then became serious again. “I am truly happy at Señor Zaportas’s recovery, but there is a stronger foreboding I cannot seem to shake. I am afraid, René.” “Afraid?” He had difficulty understanding the word, especially when referring to Akeefa. He had never met anyone less afraid in his life. “Of what or whom?” “That is what disturbs me. I do not know.” She turned and watched Raquel dancing with Khalid. She wanted him to dance with her as an adult, but Khalid would only hold her hands, as if they were children playing. “She has grown.” René followed her line of sight. “I think she has an infatuation with your brother.” “She could do worse.” “She is still young.” “Women mature quickly in this part of the world. She will not be a child much longer,” she said, her voice full of sadness. René had no response to Akeefa. They stood quietly, enjoying the gentle wind and the music in the background. After a time, he sensed her levels of discomfort increase and tried to quiet her unease. “We may run into the Salé pirates, but with the two ships, I do not think they will risk attacking us. I know they are reputed to be fanatical and crazy, but there is crazy and then there is suicidal. Are they the cause of your worry?” She linked her arm through his and shrugged. “’Tis just a feeling, but one so strong I can feel my body preparing for battle. I know you can sense my concern. Be still for a moment and see if you can sense what I am receiving. Maybe you will understand it better than I.” René stilled his mind and allowed her emotions to penetrate his. With them came a wave of unease. His inner senses shouted threat, and he had learned not to discount his intuition. He couldn’t tell from what quarter trouble would come, but soon something would challenge them. A strong gust of cold wind blew across his face, as if to punctuate his awareness of impending attack. “Oui, there is something. ’Tis time to end this party and prepare.” “Do you know what to prepare for?” “Non. We must be ready for everything. Emile,” René called to the big captain. “End the party and separate the ships.” “Aye, aye, sir,” said Emile. “Do we have trouble, sir?” “I do not know,” René said. “S’il vous plaît, Akeefa, apologize to Raquel and the Zaportas for my stopping the festivities so abruptly, and if you would ask them and your father to go below, I would appreciate it.” He turned to go. Akeefa put her hand on his arm. “Thank you, René.” “Thank me when we are safely docked in port.” Black clouds collided above the ships. Darkness was falling fast. A storm had exploded out of nowhere. James crossed over to the Seahawk, and gave the order to cut the ships loose from each other. René found it difficult to refrain from issuing commands in a situation like this. All he could do was watch while Emile battened down the ship for a blow. Raphael reported to the helm. They had found that among his other talents, Raphael had a sure hand on the whipstaff. “Release all lines,” yelled Emile. He ordered enough sail to take the Belle Poulé away from the Seahawk. The wind was now whipping through the sheets, and Emile called to Raphael to turn her into the wind. The Seahawk dropped away quickly. René hoped to rendezvous with the Seahawk before they reached Larache. While he was confident the Belle Poulé could defend herself in an attack, with two ships there would be no attack. He winced as the wind blew first from the port quarter and then from the starboard. Crosswinds made for a nasty sea. He was glad Raphael was at the helm. Even though the sun was not yet down, it was fully dark now. The darkness of a storm was different from the dark of night. It was a cloying, clinging type of darkness, more an absence of sight than of light. Promoted to first mate and transferred aboard the Poulé, Mister Wade audibly took charge of the men in the sheets. This was dangerous work, up in the rigging in an angry sea. René fought his way through the wind and crossed the deck to Emile. “Is there anything I can do?” he asked. “Are you taking command?” asked Emile, waiting. “Non, you are in command. I will retire below decks, but if you need an extra hand, do not hesitate to call me.” “Yes, sir. We can handle this. The Poulé has ridden many a blow, and she will ride out this one,” Emile said with a confidence born of long experience. “I have no doubt,” called René, as he made his way toward the hatch below. After checking on the Zaportas, he moved on to visit Akeefa before he retired. As he expected, she was reading, and her cabin had been properly battened down. “Do you feel any different now that the storm is upon us?” He hoped their premonition had been about the storm. “No. I cannot see clear what it is, but ’twas not the storm, or at least, not only the storm. The worst part is the feeling of inevitability that hangs over me, as if nothing I do will change the outcome. René, I have never felt this way before.” “We are as prepared as we can be, and to second guess our-selves is a waste of time and effort,” he said. “Rest easy. This is a sturdy ship with an experienced crew. We should be fine.” She nodded and returned to her reading. René closed the door, sensing again that empty inevitability of which she spoke. “Is a man’s destiny written?” Fourteen-year-old René asked the Maestro, taking a vicious swipe at his leg. The Maestro easily blocked the thrust, and sent a counter stroke singing toward René’s shoulder. Anticipating the strike, René turned enough so it slipped past him with a whisper of clearance. “I do not believe a man’s destiny is written in whole, but it appears there may be parts, which are inked in to give a general direction to the soul’s objective.” The Maestro circled to René’s left. “Is the day of our death fixed?” René quickly switched the sword from his right hand to his left. “I do not know,” replied the Maestro. “I do not think so. I think rather it is in response to the choices we make or have made, in addition to those choices made before we’re born.” “So if the choice to die is made by us, for some reason before we are born, then is that not still destiny?” The Maestro feinted and then brought his sword lightly across René’s chest, cutting the boy’s shirt and leaving a thin red line. “You mean like choosing not to pay close enough attention, so you get cut? I suppose you might call that destiny, but I call it stupidity.” After two hours, René could no longer remain in his cabin. He put on a woolen overcoat and went above deck, opening the hatch into a sailor’s vision of hell. The wind that had howled through the ship was now shrieking. There was little canvas showing, only a storm jib for some maneuverability. René had been in bad storms but never one like this. Thirty-foot waves crashed over the bow and then over the side. Visibility was limited. The men tied themselves to their posts to keep from being swept overboard. He made his way aft to spell Raphael for a while on the whipstaff. Only his long-honed sense of balance allowed him to navigate the pitching deck. He passed Emile, who was tied to the main mast, where he could see and direct those men remaining above. They nodded to each other. There could be no speech unless you were right beside the man. The Belle Poulé plunged like a wounded beast. Crack. A six inch spar had snapped with a retort like a musket shot. Freed, it swung unhindered, its arc speeding it straight toward a sailor in the rigging striking his head a glancing blow. Robert Fortin jerked once and then went limp. The only thing that kept him from plunging fifty feet to the deck was the rope that secured him to the yard. Fortin had taught René knots when the eleven-year-old first sailed aboard the Poulé. René kicked his shoes off and tossed his heavy coat to the deck. He raced to the main mast where Emile worked to untie the line that held him fast. When René came up beside him, he laid his hand on Emile’s. “Stop.” René yelled in his ear, “I am better than you are in the rigging, and you know it.” “You may be, but I am the captain, and that’s my man up there.” “You are the captain of this vessel, and you are not stupid. I am commanding you to stay put. At this point in our venture, I am expendable. You, however, are not. Remain where you are, Captain!” René held Emile’s eye until he reluctantly nodded and moved aside as far as his tether allowed. René began to climb the swaying rigging. He needed every ounce of strength in his hands and arms to hang on to the rain-slicked ropes. One minute the mast was vertical and the next nearly horizontal, as the ship heeled way over, low enough for water to come pouring over the gunwale. René loved this ship. She had taken him through his adolescence, and he could count on her. He silently thanked the Maestro for every brick as he climbed up to the yard. One of the other men was beginning to untie himself to aid his shipmate. “Non,” René yelled. “I will get him.” He was accustomed to walking this yard, but that was impossible in weather such as this. He clasped the yardarm with his arms and legs and inched along toward the man hanging in the rigging. When he reached Fortin, René checked
 that he was still alive. He was breathing, but unconscious. There was no way to lower him to the deck. The swaying ship would dash him to death against the mast. The only option was to fashion a harness and carry him down, tied to René’s back. René secured himself to the yard and cut enough rope to make a harness. He tied it securely around the sailor, encircling his legs and arms. He left loops of rope to put his arms through, got into the harness, and looped another coil around Fortin’s waist and his own. René tested that the lines were tight and released the man’s secure rope. He kept his own loosely around the yard, only releasing and reattaching it when he came to another piece of rigging on the yard. Robert Fortin was of medium build, but unconscious, he was nothing but dead weight. René sucked in a deep breath and maneuvered along the yard toward the main mast. He only had thirty feet to scale, but it felt like ten leagues. René was drenched with sweat despite the bitter, freezing wind. He finally reached the main mast and secured both of them. He needed to rest and gather his resources. René had never pushed himself this hard before, and he still had to get them both down to the deck. Although the shrieking wind filled his ears, he heard someone yelling. A sailor was on the opposite side of the yard, holding a large coil of rope. “I will belay you down,” he yelled. “Do you have enough line?” René shouted back. “Non, but what I have is better than nothing. I think I can get you most of the way down.” The sailor tied the rope to the yard and was preparing to toss it to René. “Throw it,” René called. The sailor flung the coiled rope toward René. The wind and swell chose that moment to heel the ship over until the mast pointed at the horizon, and it was all the men could do to remain on the yard. The man pulled back the line and prepared to throw it again. “Now,” yelled René. The rope sailed over the yard, and this time René caught it. He tied it securely to the center part of the harness at shoulder level. “You ready?” yelled René. The sailor braced himself. René threw a short line around the mast and used it to rappel himself and the unconscious man down to the deck. Even with the belaying line and the sailor’s aid, it was a fight. The wind and waves were determined to tear René from the mast. An eternity later, René’s foot touched the deck. The rope had given out twenty feet ago, and René had done the last twenty feet on determination alone, for even his great strength had been exhausted. “I will take him from here,” said Emile, making certain first that René had secured himself to the mast. He and another seaman managed to get Robert below decks to Doctor Zahrawi. René nodded to the sailor in the rigging, who laughed and waved and then grabbed for the yard as the ship heeled over again. René heard him curse and then laugh again. This storm was not going to take the Belle Poulé, but it was going to be a long night. René collapsed into his bunk. The storm had taken its time leaving and only abated in the early morning. René, Raphael, and Gavin had taken turns at the whipstaff, two of them on at every moment. Steering a ship within a storm like that was an exhausting task. Not only did the sheer power of the water and wind have to be continuously wrestled to maintain the ship’s heading, but the task also demanded a level of finesse that was, perhaps, even more exhausting. The biggest danger for a ship in a storm was to lose its rudder. Without it, the ship would turn her side into the wind and scuttle. As strong as the rudder was, the power of the storm could snap it like a matchstick in the blink of an eye. Only an experienced hand—or, in this case, two—could gauge the pressures that kept the rudder in one piece. They maintained their rotation throughout the night, René and Gavin fell to the deck when Emile sent sailors to relieve them once the storm had lessened. When the clouds cleared, Emile would call him to shoot the sun. Until then, it was a blessed relief to rest. After a time the cabin door opened and closed as Raphael staggered into the room, but it could have been a dream. René was too tired to move a muscle. There was a knock on the door. “Cap’n says the sun’s up, sir,” said a sailor from the other side of the door. ’Twas not possible. He had just gone to sleep. “What is the hour?” René called. “Mid-morning, sir.” “Tell him I will be out directly.” Had five hours really passed? René assessed his condition. Everything seemed to be in working order, but he hurt. The pain brought back memories of exercises with the Maestro. He had often experienced the edge of total muscle fatigue. He stood, noting that Raphael had not even awakened. He went through a brief series of stretching exercises, grabbed his astrolabe and logbook, and left the cabin. He came through the hatch to a beautiful day with not a cloud in the sky. A brisk wind filled the sails and the water sparkled. René walked to Emile. “I relieve you, sir.” “I can stay up for a while longer.” René waited patiently. “All right, I will go below and get some sleep. I have rotated the crew, and most of the men have rested. We did all right on canvas, since we had little on when the storm hit. Still, what was on is in pretty bad shape. The men are replacing it now. We have been maintaining an easy west by southwest course since the storm slacked off. Either we have run the strait, or the storm’s pushed us back. “What about mast damage?” asked René. “Not too much. Some minor spars and some of the rigging were lost, but we have plenty of lumber and hemp and will make all of that good before the day’s out.” “Casualties?” asked René. “Just Mister Fortin, and the doc says it was only a slight concussion thanks to you. I always said that man’s got a hard skull. Saw him butt heads in a fight once; I thought both of ’em would hit the deck. Didn’t even faze Robert. Good thing.” “Make certain all the men get something to eat and are allowed to rest. Watch on, watch off. Then get some rest yourself.” “Aye, aye, sir.” Emile turned to leave. “Oh, and Emile,” René called to his back. Emile glanced over his shoulder. “Yes, sir?” “Will you send up someone with food and coffee for me as well?” “Right away, sir. By the way, that was a fancy bit of mast work last night, Worm,” Emile said with a laugh as he made his way toward the hatch. Hearing his old nickname again brought a smile to René’s face as he set up the astrolabe to learn their location. As near as he could tell, the storm had blown the Belle Poulé through the Strait of Gibraltar and into the Atlantic ten leagues or so from the French port of Tangiers. They could have made for it, but since the ship was in good shape, René elected to continue for their destination of Larache. The plan was to off-load there and then ship the weapons overland to Fez, where Moulay al-Rashid had set up his sultanate. René called to the first mate, “Change course to east by southeast, Mister Wade.” “Aye, aye, sir,” Gavin said, calling in turn the same instructions down to the sailor on the whipstaff. The Seahawk was nowhere in sight. René hoped she had survived the storm. He was confident James and her crew had the skill to bring the ship through safely, but nothing on the sea was certain. Nevertheless, there was a problem. Two ships were most likely safe from attack. One ship was fair game. “S’il vous plaît, Mister Wade, double the lookouts and bring the ship to standby quarters,” René said. “Aye, aye, sir.” Gavin searched the calm sea. “We are in enemy waters, and this ship is a tasty bit of loot coming into port. Make certain the falconets are manned and armed. Arrange for a system to wake the men who are down if we sight a ship,” René added. “And tell the lookouts to stay sharp.” René imagined Andrew up in the crow’s nest aboard the Seahawk. That boy had a keener eye than anyone René had met. Right now, he wished the lad was aboard the Belle Poulé. René finished his log entries and went below deck to stow the astrolabe and log. He left the room without disturbing Raphael and returned to the deck. Walking forward to the forecastle, René stood at the rail and scanned the empty horizon. The Belle Poulé was making good speed toward the coast of Morocco with a strong tail wind. He sensed Akeefa coming up the stairs. She emerged through the hatch dressed in a traditional satin long sleeved Arabic dress, but without her hijab, her hair and face were uncovered. Her expression became more animated as she approached. “Are you all right?” he asked. “I am fine, as are all of our other passengers. There is, however, nothing worse than a bad storm after a large meal,” she said with a rueful smile. René laughed. “The next time I know a bad storm is coming, I will suggest we eat lightly.” “Please. How far are we from Larache?” “About seven or eight hours if the wind holds. That storm cut a whole two days from our schedule.” He offered her his arm as she stepped onto the forecastle. “Are you still feeling the same?” Akeefa nodded and glanced at the hatch as the sheikh and Miguel came above deck. Both men were armed. “René, please prepare the ship for battle,” said the sheikh. René scanned the sea around the ship. Nothing. “Have you seen something, sir?” “Not with our eyes,” said Miguel. “But we will soon be in a fight for our lives.” René maintained eye contact with Miguel, and then called to Gavin. “S’il vous plaît, Mister Wade, call the men to quarters. Get Mister Lamert up here and have someone awaken the rest of the crew.” “Aye, aye, sir,” On a calm day like this one, Gavin Wade’s stentorian voice rang out, heard from one end of the ship to the other. Men began to move. The sheikh turned to Akeefa. “My dear, please change into your sparring clothes. We will need your help, and your current attire is not conducive to free movement.” “Yes,
 Father.” She turned to go below, but not before catching René’s eye. Well, at least the wait is over. The lookout in the crow’s nest called, “ship aft starboard,” and then again, “ship aft port. Make that three ships.” At the same time, Emile burst through the hatch. He turned to yell at René, “I relieve you, sir!” “I stand relieved, sir.” Emile sized up the situation and called out new orders. “Mister Wade, get on every scrap of canvas we have. They’re xebecs and I believe we can outrun ’em with this wind.” Mister Wade relayed the commands. Men scurried up the rigging, pulling out all of the sail the Belle Poulé could show. The ship charged ahead as if released from restraints. Raphael came up through the hatch, still a little groggy. He shook his head as if to clear it. Emile yelled to him, “On the whipstaff, son. Hold the wind abeam. Squeeze every knot out of her you can. Once we get in sight of land, get us into a port.” “Aye, aye, Captain.” Raphael ran for his post. The enemy ships were visible now along the horizon. They were indeed xebecs, a cross between a galley—with oars or sweeps—and a lateen-rigged sailing vessel. The lateen sail was triangular and allowed the xebec to sail closer to the wind, adding points on the tack and making the ship more maneuverable than the larger galleon. The sweeps allowed them to maneuver closer in to land, where the wind dropped off. While the smaller ship boasted a narrow hull for speed, it also had a wide beam, which meant upwards of a hundred and fifty men. Still, the Belle Poulé could outrun the smaller ships if the wind held. If it held. Fortunately, Mister Haddad was still aboard, training the Poulé’s crew. Emile sent him to man the stern chaser. The man was a crack shot with the long nine, and should the Salé pirates get close enough, they were in for a surprise. The wind had lessened, and the corsairs were closing the distance using the sweeps to add speed. “Mister Wade, arm the men!” bellowed Emile. While both the sheikh and Señor Zaportas were armed, René was not. He had a flash of the Maestro shaking his head as he headed for his cabin to retrieve his weapons. Moving down the stairs and into the narrow galley-way, he almost ran into Akeefa, She was dressed in her sparring clothes, heading above deck. They stopped short, facing each other. She hugged him and then skirted around him and flew up the stairs. René returned above deck armed with his sword and pistol. The corsairs were much closer, almost within the cannon’s range. At least they were with the nine-pounder in the hands of a gunner like Mister Haddad. Emile had strategically placed musketeers in the rigging. The hatch had been closed and pegged, and its defense would be a last ditch effort by the Belle Poulé. René hoped it never came to that. He walked over to Emile. “Your orders, sir?” he said. “René, captain the men on the port side. On the sheikh’s recommendation, the young woman will captain the men on the starboard side.” Emile sounded doubtful. Even though he had heard of her actions in La Alcazaba, he had not seen her fight. Given the customary exaggeration of most seaman’s tales, his hesitation was understandable. “Emile, she disarmed me whilst sparring,” René said. “Do not spare a thought for the starboard side. If the corsairs come to her, they will have little time to entertain their regret.” Emile nodded. “I have assigned Khalid to captain the men in the forecastle, and Abdul Karim to take charge of the men in the aftcastle. The sheikh and Señor Zaportas will reinforce as they think necessary.” The wind had been falling off steadily, and one of the xebecs was coming into range. Mister Haddad fired the first shot. It was eight hundred yards if it was a foot. The men swiftly reloaded the cannon, their hours of practice having brought the reload time down below three minutes. Still, those minutes were like hours as the slow match on the longer barrelled weapon gave off a sizzling sound. Then the world was rent again. The cannon fired its deadly gift—grape shot, small balls and scraps of iron strung together like evil pearls reaching out to grace the throat of the enemy mast and bring it crashing to the deck. Mister Haddad reloaded and fired again, this time taking out the triangular lateen sail aboard the closer of the three ships. The storm of grape shot swept through the slaver’s foredeck, causing a wave of small explosions as wood and flesh disintegrated in its wake. The men aboard the Belle Poulé cheered. The Salé pirates returned fire, but their aim was random and fell short. Mister Haddad, a short, intense man, had changed to ball shot and fired again, getting the range but missing the ship. On his next shot, however, the nine-pound iron ball went through the slaver’s hull on the port side, at the water line. There was a rumbling sound, as if the xebec was trying to digest the iron. Then a huge explosion sent splinters and bits of the pirate ship out over the sea. A lucky shot had hit the ship’s armory. As what remained of the slaver ship moved through the smoke, she began to go down. They could hear the pirates screaming. This far out, going overboard was a death sentence. For a short while, it looked as if the Belle Poulé might outrun the remaining two ships, until one after the next her sails began to luff, going slack in a dying wind. The two xebecs, like wolves, moved closer as the Belle Poulé slowed. The slavers were now close enough that those aboard the Poulé could see the mass of pirates, packed to the gunnels of both ships, waiting to board. Mister Haddad targeted the remaining ships, but they were better conned, and under oar they managed to avoid the cannon’s fire by taking random zigzag courses. He changed back to grape shot. Perhaps the scattered shot would catch one of the remaining slavers on its tack. The Belle Poulé floated motionless in the dead calm of a windless ocean. The approaching slavers moved swiftly toward her stern, keeping away from the firing lines of the Poulé’s broadside cannon. A black rain of grappling hooks descended over the gunwale, and the first group of slavers poured over the side of the ship. The second enemy ship continued around, crossing the bow of the Poulé to her starboard side. As it came past, the forward falconet crew fired a round of grape shot directly down into it, cutting a swath of destruction through the men waiting on its deck. The shot had little long-term effect other than to further enrage the screaming pirates. As a return gesture, a volley of musket fire sleeted through the gun crew frantically reloading their weapon. A grappling hook materialized in the bow gunwale. Then there were two, ten, and then twenty as the ship’s bow dipped with the weight of men coming over the side. Within moments, all parts of the ship were engaged. The Belle Poulé’s complement of one hundred and twelve men was outnumbered nearly three-to-one as the deck took on the appearance of an apple core covered with hungry black ants. René allowed his training to take over. He settled into that cold killing place as he faced the screaming men that clawed their way over the side. Swarthy men with shaved heads and tattooed faces, these pirates haunted the shipping lanes. Their prizes fed the slave markets of Algiers and Morocco. The slaver’s weapon of choice was the scimitar, though some musket barrels were visible in the mass of men. The first slaver to die aboard the Belle Poulé came at René, shouting in Arabic, and spraying spittle while waving his scimitar in a circle over his head. René moved aside, allowing the man’s momentum to carry him past. A swift tip cut to the man’s raised wrist severed the tendons, and his weapon fell from a lifeless hand. René spun around and reached out with his rapier, backhanding the man’s neck. The corsair’s continued forward motion caused the weapon to slice through his jugular. Shock and surprise animated his features as his mouth gaped open and then he was gone. René leaned down and retrieved his scimitar. With two weapons, the dead quickly piled up before him. The odd sensation was like gracefully wading through quicksand— a macabre ballet whose set was the deck of a ship painted in shades of red, perfumed with the smell of blood and fear, and accompanied by the orchestral screams of the dying. At times like this, René hated and appreciated his skill with equal intensity. Every time he killed a slaver, another took his place. Akeefa was on the other side of the ship. René’s connection with her gave him confidence that she held her own. Sheikh Ghassan and Miguel were fighting alongside Raphael and Abdul Karim on the aftcastle. René turned forward and a chill crept down his spine. Because of the newer design of the Belle Poulé, the forecastle was lower than the aftcastle, increasing the ship’s speed and maneuverability. The drawback was that boarders had lower gunwales to overcome in the bow—a disadvantage that would require payment. Khalid had taken up position on the forecastle, along with eight of the Musselmen. Within minutes, enemy musket fire had killed three of his men, and the six remaining were now facing at least twenty corsairs with more coming over the bow. Akeefa tried to fight her way in the direction of her brother, but there were too many pirates. The same held true for René. He could not kill them fast enough. “Focus your fire on the forecastle,” he yelled to the men in the rigging. The crew redirected their fire toward the mass of pirates confronting Khalid, but it had a negligible effect. Two more men died protecting him, and now they were four. At last, Akeefa edged toward her brother as the men facing her struggled, frantic to get out of her way. Still, there were too many. Time had always been subservient to René’s perceptions, but on this occasion, the sound of the fighting faded to silence as time stopped
 altogether. Frozen, his consciousness expanded until it encompassed the entire ship. He felt every heartbeat and knew Khalid was about to die. He would fail again to protect one close to him. The wrenching sadness and guilt that descended upon him jerked him out of his expanded consciousness, and the world began again. René was closer to Khalid than Akeefa, but not close enough. He glanced to his left. Khalid was alone, the last of his men dead at his feet. Akeefa screamed as the slavers repeatedly stabbed her brother. An emotional explosion ripped through René, and for a split second the battle aboard the ship stopped. Then it began anew. René reached out to Akeefa with the deepest level of his being. Together they drew on a power hundreds of times

Baker, Elliott. The Sun God's Heir: Return Book One (Kindle Locations 4774-5116). Hypatia Press. Kindle Edition. 

Kane clamped his jaw tight. Hannah had been acting peculiar earlier and he prayed to God, 'twas delirium. What if he was wrong? What if Zuto's powers had grown and were no longer limited to the island? Shite, maybe he should have stayed with the lass rather than sending Doc. Standing up on deck, Kane clasped his spyglass and aimed it at Tortuga's busy port. Sailors carried barrels and wooden crates on their shoulders as they loaded and unloaded boats. Prostitutes, swaying their hips and revealing cleavage, tried to entice the sailors with their goods. Kane sighted in on a man with curly brown hair, the wind blowing strands free of his neatly tied queue, pacing the busy docks. He held his head high and clasped his hands behind his rigid back. Blood dripped down his chin. Kane's stomach dropped. He recognized his brother, despite the fat swollen lip, grubby white shirt and green breeches. William never wore his shirt unbuttoned, and was emphatic about having a shine to his boots. He always dressed like an officer. Something was off. Why was William alone? Where the hell was Ronan Macmillan? Damn it! Kane had sent Ronan and William last week to investigate the whereabouts of the Fiery Damsel. Palmer and his crew had been attacking the islands and Kane wanted to know why. At first, Kane had refused William's demand to go, since he was human and not cursed. But his brother would not be left behind. Ronan had volunteered to keep William safe, his brother's chagrin at being treated less than capable. Where was Ronan? The man must be dead. He'd never abandon William. Kane tightened his grip on the spyglass. Another one of his decisions had gone astray. He should have never allowed William to go and locked him in the brig instead. Sean clapped him on his back and his other hand squeezed his shoulder. "Hey, Captain, you got us here." Kane stiffened. "You doubted my ability?" "Nay, Capt'n, cutting it close, too close. Tonight's the full moon." Kane gripped the spyglass tighter and gritted his teeth. "I'm well aware of the curse, Mallory." Sean cleared his throat. "`Tis only William on the dock." "Aye," Kane muttered. "Ronan would never have left him. Something's a miss." "Orders Capt'n," Sean asked. "Go and fetch my brother, " Kane said. He lowered the spyglass. "Aye, aye, Captain." Sean strutted away. "Lower the longboat mates," he hollered. The full moon was indeed approaching. Kane's tongue rolled over his sharpened incisors and his blood slowed. Kane tilted his head from side to side, stretching out the kinks in his neck. Bloody hell. He slammed the spyglass back into his belt. Tonight, he'd be no better than Palmer--a vampire. He chewed on his cheek. His fondness for Hannah was growing and he didn't need a distraction. He had to protect his men and find a cure to the curse. But every time he was around her, he acted as thick as a stone. What would she think if she found out he was a monster? He had to get the lass off his ship. He wanted her to remember him as a man, not a bloody monster. He closed his eyes and hung his head. Even now the moon called to him. His throat ached. His stomach growled. Damn, the bloodlust was upon him again, deeper than any human food could satisfy. He didn't want Hannah to discover the truth, to see the fear in her eyes, to see the loathing, to see the hate. William strolled up next to him. He opened his arms. "Brother." Kane returned the bear hug and held him tight. His tension lessened. He released William and slapped his back. "Grand to have you on board, brother." "We need to talk." "Aye," Kane agreed. "Macmillan?" William shook his head. "We had just left Shark's Tavern when Palmer's men ambushed us. Ronan and I fought, but they took him." "And?" "They said if you want him, come and get him." Kane clenched his fist. "Fine. I'll kill the bloody bastard. Wha..." "Capt'n," the topman cried from the crow's nest. "On the starboard side. 'Tis the Fiery Damsel." Kane aimed his spyglass at the Fiery Damsel, Palmer's colors of a red skeleton on a black background flapping in the wind framed up in the glass. The Fiery Damsel sailed straight toward them, cannons ready, but at the last minute, they changed course and came up behind them. Ronan was aboard the bloody ship, locked in the damn brig. Palmer would enjoy torturing him, listening to him scream. With Ronan being immortal, Palmer could indulge his every fantasy and wait for Ronan to heal, only to hurt him all over again. Kane refused to abandon him. "Weigh anchor. Clap on the sails." Men scrambled to loosen and spread more sail in order to get the Phoenix on her way and increase her speed. Kane narrowed his eyes. "Fall off, Mallory. The bastard's coming behind the stern." The Soaring Phoenix turned to sail with the wind and pick up speed to engage the Fiery Damsel, but even as Mallory spun the wheel, the Phoenix failed to maneuver fast enough. The Fiery Damsel fired, smoke flowing around her hull. Cannonballs splashed into the water, spraying droplets onto the Phoenix's deck. The helmsman grabbed the wheel, turning to the ship to a hard port. "She's coming about." He struggled with the stubborn wheel while the rudder slowly turned. A loud blast shook the ship. A cannonball slammed into the chaser, the cannon at the stern. Bits of shot fell, tearing away wood, sails and flesh. Two of Kane's men screamed and toppled into the water. Fire broke out on the stern. Black smoke swirled around the Phoenix's hull. "Man the guns," Kane cried. He ran to the bow and pulled out his spyglass. Ronan was nowhere to be seen. Damn it! The Fiery Damsel closed the distance and fired. Another cannonball hit the Soaring Phoenix's hull and the ship rocked. Kane's crew ran to the guns and manned their stations. Men poured gunpowder into a parchment and placed it in the hole while other crewmen took a rammer and shoved it down. The cannonball was placed inside the gun followed by another wad stuffed into the hole to keep the cannonball from rolling out. The front of the gun carriage was placed on the ship's bulwark and Kane clenched his fist. Too long. Too long. "Fire," he cried. The cannons fired and missed the Fiery Damsel's hull. She still outmaneuvered them. Another cannonball hit the Phoenix and she rocked in the water. Kane's men were hit and fell screaming into the water. A fire broke out on the deck, the oily black smoke snaking around the ship and obscuring the action. Kane coughed and his eyes watered. He spun around and turned still as stone. Through the haze of the smoke, Hannah walked across the deck. His heart slammed into his chest, blood thumping through him. She needed to be safe. He would not lose her. He ran towards her, his heart thumping in his chest, pushing man after man out his way. Smoke blurred his vision and he skidded on a piece of hemp rope. He wobbled and went down on one knee but got back up and ran as he saw her too close to the rail, facing the Fiery Damsel, as if she were ready to engage in battle. Hannah stared at the Fiery Damsel and squared her shoulders back. Grim determination flickered over her face. The blood drained from his face and he grew dizzy. For Jaaysus sake, what was she doing? Kane dodged running crewmen and shards of wood, and wounded men. All that mattered was Hannah and getting her below deck. At another cannon blast from the Fiery Damsel, he shouted, "Shite, Hannah, get below deck!" Hannah held up her palms, facing the Fiery Damsel. She yelled over the thundering cannons. "Stay back. I know what I'm doing." Despite the clear blue sky and a calm sea, her brown hair churned around her face, her shirt and trousers rippled over her slender form. She raised her arms into the air and a wall of water rose out of the sea. She pointed to the burning stern and a stream of water splashed dousing the flames on the Soaring Phoenix's stern. Droplets of water sprinkled onto Kane's body. He gaped at steam rising from the stern. Had she just commanded water to move? Hannah bent her body, and as she slowly stood, she moved her hands back towards her shoulders. Another wet wall formed, this one higher than the last, the roar hurting Kane's ears. She lunged her hands forward, and the wet wall followed the direction of her arms and thundered towards the Fiery Damsel. Kane's crew yelled, but he couldn't make out their words due to the thundering wave. It crashed into the Fiery Damsel, nearly tipping over the ship. The water rolled up and down, tossing the Fiery Damsel, further and further and further out to sea. Her sails were tattered and flapped, helpless against the mast. "Mother of God," he murmured. Kane wanted to hunt the Fiery Damsel down and finish her, kill Palmer, but tonight was the full moon. His men needed to feed. His attention ripped back to Hannah as the disabled ship limped away. Her arms dropped to her side and she fell to her knees, her hair hanging in her face. She sank to her knees, her hand shaking as she swiped her limp hair out of her face. Blood trickled down her nose, but a smile spread across her face. She panted, "I can't believe I did it." Kane glanced at the disappearing Fiery Damsel and Hannah. He narrowed his eyes and marched over to her. He grabbed her arm. "Bloody hell, you're a witch."

Guida, ML. A Pirate's Curse: Paranormal Historical Vampire Pirate Romance (Legends of the Soaring Phoenix Book 1) (pp. 82-88). Buffalo Mountain Press. Kindle Edition. 

Hannah's eyes widened and struggled against him. "Don't hurt me." Kane yanked her across the deck. His men stepped back, giving them a wide birth. Some stood slack-jawed, some wide-eyed, still others scowled and grimaced. The brave put their hands on their scabbards, ready to draw their weapons and slice her to ribbons. "Let." She slapped his hand. "Go." Another slap. "Of." Slap, slap. "Me." Slap, slap. She kicked his shins, but Kane could care less. He wanted her alone. He dragged her past a glowering William. "Kane," William warned. He folded his arms across his chest and tapped his foot. Even in his tattered wet clothes, he would have made a grand bishop with his stiff stance and condescending scowl. "Stay here, William," Kane glared. "That's an order." "I don't--" "I am the bloody captain. You'll do my bidding brother or be locked in the brig." "Where are you taking me?" Hannah demanded. "To my cabin." "What? Why?" She jammed her heel onto his boot. "I demand you release me at once." He pulled her against his chest and peered into her stormy brown eyes. Her intoxicating smell of jasmine rushed over him, enslaving him in a pool of conflicting emotions. Her squirming body pressed against him teased his growing passion. He gazed at her frowning soft lips and an urge to kiss her, to silence her protests, swept over him. Was the little minx casting a spell? Or had she already cast one? One of desire, lust and need. "Release me." "You lied to me." He narrowed his eyes, forcing back his passion. "Witch." "What? I am...." Before she could finish, he hauled her down to his cabin and tossed her inside. She stumbled and whirled around. Her stormy eyes declared war on him. He slammed the door shut behind them. "How dare you! You bastard." He put his hands on his hips. "You're not leaving this cabin." "Why not?" "Why not? You're a witch and put my men at risk." "Excuse me?" She put her hands on her hips. "Unless I am completely daft, the Fiery Damsel was about to tear this ship apart." He stuck out his chin. "You're mistaken." He took a step towards her. Hannah glared. Blood trickling out of her right nostril. "You've got a bloody nose." Even with a bleeding nose and a battered face, she was beautiful, a vision of beauty, but was she from heaven or hell? "Yes." She ran her sleeve over her nose, smearing the blood on her shirt. "I can see that." She stomped over to the bed and sat. "So, if you are going to beat me, get it over with." "Beat you?" He stilled. "Is that..." She tilted her chin. "Yes, if you must know. Father beats me when I use my power." "The lashes?" "Yes, damn it." He blinked. Her chest heaved up and down. What kind of a man was her father? "I'm finally able to save someone with my powers, and I'm punished for it. You are no different than my father. Your crew would have been dead without me. I'm not a witch and I don't cast spells." She flopped on her stomach and lifted the back of her shirt. "So, get it over with. I don't care. Your crew would have been dead without me." Slowly unfolding his arms, he edged over to the bed. She jerked her head away, her shoulders shaking. Was she crying? Her back was stiff. Her hair covered her shoulders and her upper back, but failed to hide the faded angry red lashes and scarring her back. He had half inclination to march down to the brig and whip the flesh from her father's bulbous body. How many times had he beaten her? Was it for using her powers or failing to use them? Gazing at her naked back, his fingers itched to run over her silky skin and make her forget the pain, to let her know her body was to be worshiped, to be kissed. He gritted his teeth. Damn, he was losing control. He sat on the bed and Hannah sucked in her breath. "How long have you possessed this power?" "Why do you care?" "Tell me lass." He lifted his hand to move the hair out of her face, but she turned her head. "I was born with it. My ancestor was a gypsy queen who possessed magical powers and could move objects with her mind. I told you we don't cast spells." She sighed. "Just get it over with Kane." He clasped her shoulder and gently turned her around. Her wet doe eyes studied him warily. He wanted to erase her pain, get her to trust him. He wrapped his arm around her and pulled her to the edge of the bed. "Your father despises your powers?" "Yes." Her voice choked. "For not being able to use them properly. Because of me, my mother died." "Your father blames you?" Tears misted in her eyes. Her nod was almost imperceptible. "But why?" "I...I..." She stammered, looked away. Her jasmine scent drifted over him, weeding away at his control. She was in pain. Bloody hell, why was he pushing her to talk about this? 'Twas cruel, but he had to know for the safety of his crew. "What did you do?" "Carriages," she whispered. "Carriages?" "Runaway horses." She knotted her fingers together in her lap. He frowned. "Runaway horses were pulling a carriage?" "Lightning struck a tree. The horses spooked and took off running. The carriages came barreling down--" Her voice faded. She closed her eyes. Kane's heart wrenched. Poor lass, she must feel so responsible. Hell, he would. "We had been shopping. I had gone with my father to the sweet shop, while my mother went across the street to the millinery. She wanted a new hat to wear to my aunt's ball." A sick feeling settled low in Kane's stomach. "Ah, Hannah." "Kane," she whimpered. "I was eating a licorice whip when my mother spied us. She was wearing a jaunty green hat decorated with white ribbon. She waved to us, started across the street..." "Then came the carriages." She gulped visibly. Closed her eyes. Her breath came in short, shallow gasps. "The horses were upon her." Kane put up a hand to smooth down her hair. She leaned against his shoulder and opened her eyes. "My father yelled, "Do not just stand there. Do something with those abominable powers of yours! Save your mother!" "I tried to make the carriages turn in a different direction. But they were coming so fast. So very fast. And I was so slow." "Shhh," he soothed. "You don't need to say anything more." She stared blankly ahead as if she were back in the moment. "The one thing that sticks with me is that silly green hat with the white ribbon lying smashed in the road." He heard a muffled sob. He frowned. "How old were you when she died?" "Seven," she murmured. The bloody Sassenach. The bastard had been abusing her since she was seven. He gave into temptation and moved her hair. "Is that what you want me to do? Beat you?" "That's what father always does. Why would you be any different?" "Because I'm not him." He clasped her shirt and pulled it down, covering her marks. She tensed beneath his touch. "I promise I won't hurt you, lass." She flicked her hair and rolled onto her back and stared up at him. Confusion clouded her eyes. "Why not? I could see by your face and your crew's that you hate witches. Witches cast spells. I don't. I'm descended from a gypsy queen." "Aye, so you're not a witch. You're a gypsy. A beautiful one." Her eyes widened, but not with fear. Gratitude filled them. They were alive with so much emotion, alive with a need, a hunger and an intensity that scorched the last of his resolve. She moistened her lips. "Kiss me." His iron will crumbled. She wanted him. He groaned. He wanted to devour her mouth and then slowly remove her clothes, licking and tasting her naked flesh. But for now, he would have to be satisfied with a kiss. He stared at her pliable lips. Closing his eyes, he captured her lips and pushed them apart, wanting to taste her. Her hands slid up his chest and she pulled him closer to her. His kiss became harder, passionate, demanding. He wanted to remember what she tasted like, savor this moment. Bloody hell, what had the lass done to him? Where was the man with the all the answers, the man with the perfect plan? Her fingers slid around his neck and she pulled him down, holding him against her. He could hear her blood rushing through her veins and her heart beat against his chest. He didn't know whose was louder, his or hers. This lassie clouded his every judgment. Rather than hunting down Palmer and finding a cure, his thoughts focused on her, her lips, her curvy body, her soft feminine scent. She matched his fervor and her kiss was as desperate as his. She slid her fingers through his hair and he groaned. Tingles rushed over his back and he shivered. He wanted more of her, wanted to listen to her cry out his name, to hear her moan. He slid his hand up her shirt and she trembled. His hand clasped her breast and toyed with her nipple. She moaned, fanning his desire. The monster within him wanted her. All of her. No matter the cost. Who the hell was he fooling? 'Twasn't just the vampire demanding to explore her secrets. He hungered for her, to feed on her to satisfy his every wicked impulse. He left her lips and kissed the edge of her mouth, moving toward her slender neck. Her blood pulsed in her veins. His tongue rolled over his elongated fangs. He kissed her neck and scraped her neck with his fangs. He wanted to stop but the monster within him wanted her, wanted to taste her coppery liquid to see if 'twas as sweet as the recesses of her mouth. Someone pounded on the door. "Capt'n." Kane licked her skin, putting his mouth on her flesh, he sucked hard. Every impulse demanded he bite her, but he fought back, only allowing himself to suck her skin as a man, not as a vampire. Chapter 10 Hannah groaned as Kane slowly released her and peered down at her. She couldn't take her eyes off his wicked lips and wanted him to kiss her. He pushed her hair behind her ear. "You're so beautiful lass." She trembled as his fingers brushed over her skin, his dark eyes holding her captive. "I've a surprise for you." He bent over and brushed his lips over hers again. She parted her mouth to deepen the
 kiss, but Kane pulled away and stood. Hannah sighed. "I'll return shortly." Her fingers touched her bruised lips, sensitive skin throbbing from where his stubble rubbed against her. Feeling like a harlot, she straightened her skewed shirt and covered her exposed breasts. "Where are you going?" "You'll see, lass." A wicked gleam formed in his eye and he quickly exited. Hannah rushed over to the mirror. Her disheveled hair, puffy lips and red neck revealed her shame. What had she been doing? If Kane hadn't pulled away, she'd not have stopped him, kissing, indulging in his spicy taste. She wanted more. So much more. To have him take her places where she had never dreamed of going. She crossed her arms across her chest. What was she thinking? He was a pirate. She barely knew him, yet, she let him take liberties with her that no other man dared. Aboard this ship, she was his for the taking? Had her powers taken a darker side? On his ship, she used her powers more than she had in her entire life. Were there more to her powers than moving objects? Did they ignite sensual feelings for her or was it Kane? Hannah straightened her hair and tucked her shirt into her trousers. Why was she so attracted to him? She had never experienced these feelings before and couldn't even name the emotions swarming around her. The door swung open and she jumped as Kane strolled in with Cook just behind him. The aroma of hot food infiltrated the cabin and her stomach growled. Her mouth watered. She hadn't realized how hungry she was until she smelled Cook's latest creations. Cook brushed past her carrying a tray loaded with a platter piled with sliced salted pork, steaming mashed potatoes and a bottle of Chianti wine. Kane gave a slight bow. "We were to feast tonight.

Guida, ML. A Pirate's Curse: Paranormal Historical Vampire Pirate Romance (Legends of the Soaring Phoenix Book 1) (pp. 88-96). Buffalo Mountain Press. Kindle Edition. 

The ragtag sailing ship sped toward them in a thirty knot tailwind, the black flag flapping from the main mast. Pirates! Twenty-year-old Hannah's stomach tightened as the rogue ship chased them. "Miss," Sally whispered. Hannah's maid, and constant companion, bit her lip and stared, her eyes wide at the pursuing frigate. "What if they overtake us?" "We haven't lost yet, Sally." Hannah prayed they would be mistaken for cabin boys. She prayed the bindings restraining their breasts and their drooping breeches that hid their curves were convincing. She prayed they would escape her father's warning of the rape and torture of female captives. A cannonball sailed through the air and smashed into the Dolphin's second mast, splintering wood. Sally clutched Hannah's arm, digging her fingers into her flesh, and screaming. Large holes shattered and ripped the topsails of the Dutch flute ship. Fragments of wood crashed into the black sea, splashing water onto the portside. The smell of burning wood ignited a stream of heat down Hannah's spine. She coughed and her eyes burned. The pirate ship's long gun fired. Canister shot flew through the air. A sailor shrieked. His face blackened and bloody, he twirled around on the deck and fell over the side into the dark ocean. The frigate pursued the slower Dolphin through the black smoke. The flute sailed at twenty knots, her top speed, but the frigate skipped across the moonlight water, closing the gap fast. Cannons fired. Bar shot flew through the air, knocking three men into the water. Screams of pain, cracks of guns, splitting of wood, filled Hannah's ears. "Hannah," her father yelled. "Get below deck. Now." Ignoring her father's order, she gripped the railing and waited, praying they could out maneuver the pirates. "Make ready the guns," the Dolphin's boatswain, John Vane ordered. His brown hair had fallen loose from his queue and spilled over his broad shoulders. At over six feet tall John never had to repeat an order. He unsheathed his cutlass, his hazel eyes trained upon the enemy. Dolphin's gunners were surprisingly synchronized. Men rammed cartridges down the cannon, packing the charge tight into the chamber. Other crewmen rolled the cannonball down the muzzle. Hemp rope was stuffed in to keep the cannonball from rolling out. After priming the cannons, the men waited for a rolling wave and John's order. "Fire," he commanded. The cannons roared, jolting the ship. Cannonballs hit the vast frigate's haul, but she failed to veer away. Sweat pouring down his temples, her father, Captain Justin Knight, peered through his spyglass. "Damn! It didn't even slow her down." Her father never swore. Biting her lip, Hannah gripped the railing, her arms shaking. The crew held swords and pistols at the ready as the frigate grew closer. Hannah wished her father hadn't forbidden her a weapon. She desperately desired the security of her own cutlass or sword or pike, even if she had no idea how to use one. On the frigate, shipboard cannon returned fire, the loud boom racking her ears. She winced. Musket balls and lead pellets hurled through the air. Two crewmen staggered and fell on the deck, their blood staining the wet wood. A chunk of burning timber crashed onto the deck beside her. Fire burst out, lighting up the midnight sky. Swelling smoke snaked around the ship. Men threw buckets of water onto the flames--to no avail. The roaring blaze quickly dissolved into steam. The crew was running out of water, out of buckets and out of time. Grandmother's voice whispered in Hannah's mind. You can help them. Block out every sound. Concentrate my dear. Control your fear. Although Grandmother had been dead over a year, her voice would echo in Hannah's ear and push her to conjure up her power to move objects with her mind. She never saw Grandmother's ghost, but her voice was real, clear, strong. Her sisters didn't possess the ability, didn't want the ability and didn't need to fight for their father's love. Grandmother said Hannah was blessed. Blessed wasn't what her father alleged. "I can help." Hannah stared at Sally as she removed her clinging fingers. Sally nodded, her lower lip trembling. "But your father." "I know." Hannah bit her lip and rubbed her shaking palms on her breeches. She'd be breaking her father's most steadfast rule--never reveal her cursed power. Her backside ached and the welts had yet to fade from the last time she broke his rule. Chills rushed through her at defying him. A wave rushed over the Dolphin, carrying away a sailor. He bobbed up and down screaming in the ocean. Hannah blocked out the screams and sounds of cannon fire and stared at a rope. Her power swirled inside her, spreading tingles over her. One end of the rope flung into the sea, encircled the shrieking man and yanked him back on board. Her father stormed across the deck. "You foolish girl, John would have saved him. I forbid you to use your power aboard my ship again. Or the next time, I swear I'll sell you off as an indentured servant and send you to the Americas." He grabbed her arm and shook her. "Do you hear me?" "Yes," she murmured. Her grandparents and mother were dead. No one would stop him. What choice did she have but to obey? He narrowed his eyes. "No, I think you need something to remember my warning." He threw her up against the railing and thrashed her lower back. She cried out. "Captain," a male voice yelled. "Don't do it again," her father hissed in her ear and stormed off. Hannah rubbed her backside and blinked back tears. What choice did she have? She had to try and save their crew. Father would punish her again. If they survived... She braced her shoulders and refused to give into her panic. Ignore the fear. Ignore the fear. Ignore the fear. Closing her eyes, Hannah inhaled and drew on her power. Her heart fluttered and her body prickled. Slowing her breath, she opened her eyes, blocked out the screams around her and faced the ocean, palms out. A blowing wind of energy left her hands. Hair swirled around her face and her shirt billowed and her breeches flapped. Using her power to dip into the ocean and create a steady stream of water, she spun the stream into a twirling funnel. "The waves," one of the crewmen yelled. "Blimey. Look out!" Droplets of seawater fell onto her face and hands. The funnel splashed onto the deck, sucking up the flames. Steam coiled through the ship. The crewmen stared at her owl-eyed. She half smiled. For once, her powers worked. Wetness trickled out of her nose and into her mouth. She moistened her lips. There was no mistake--blood. Damn, a bloody nose. The wind died. Her hair fell limp across her shoulders and her overlarge shirt and breeches sagged onto her small frame. The funnel waned into a tiny shower of rain and dissolved. As her power diminished, she dropped her aching arms to her side and caught her breath. "Hannah." Her father yelled her name like an expletive. She jumped. Her father approached, his pewter gray eyes narrowed. Wind blew his salt and pepper black hair around his scowling face. He grabbed her arm and bit his fingers into her flesh. She winced. "What did I tell you about using your accursed power?" "I...I...I wanted to help." His punishing scowl sent her blood thumping through her veins. "We haven't lost yet. Now..." "She's gonna break," Spencer Billings, the rope maker cried. Her father released her. The large main mast that gave the ship all its speed, snapped and swayed, tattered white sails swinging overhead. The ship rocked, dangerously from side to side, water sloshed up on the deck, crewmen slamming onto the portside rail. Hannah froze. The ship was perishing. Another cannonball crashed into the portside, the ship groaned and shuddered. Hannah bumped into her father's stomach. He grabbed her arms, fear reflected in his eyes. "Use your damn powers." "But father, you said..." "I know what I said!" He glared at her. "Use them dammit, or we are all dead." Sally put her hand on her shoulder. "I believe in you, Miss." Hannah nodded. The broken mast and sails collapsed into the water. The dying ship groaned as it tilted sharply to the starboard side. The ship moaned and moaned and moaned. Hannah slipped on the canted deck and smashed into the mast. Stunned, she shook her head. You can do this. Focus, my dear, focus. Sweat trickled down her back. Hannah wiped her hot face on her sleeve. Despite the rising heat, she shivered as she crawled to her feet, clinging to the broken mast. If only Grandmother was there, offering her encouraging words, coaxing her on how to draw on her power. But Grandmother was dead. Hannah pictured Grandmother standing next to her in her favorite green gown embroidered with gold and silver beads, bracelets dangling from her wrists. Long, white hair pulled into a soft bun. Her green eyes had always captivated her. In the sunlight, her eyes lightened and turned bluish-green while in the moonlight, her eyes darkened to an emerald. "Believe in yourself, Hannah," Grandmother had always said. Holding onto Grandmother's words, Hannah's surging power sent sweeping tingles through her limbs. She held up her hands, palms facing the dangling broken mask, and sails floating in the black ocean. Her hair swept around her face and her energy flowed once again, her shirt and breeches rippling around her. Energy swirled away, forming a whirlwind of air that spun around the mast. Bits of wood and splinters slammed back into the cracked mast. The wavering beam lifted away from the railing, dragging the sails out of the ocean. Another cannonball crashed into the portside. Hannah jolted and fell flat onto the deck. Her concentration broke. The mast snapped, spun half away around and crashed onto the railing, splashing back into the water. A jagged crack split the middle of the ship, the bow dipping lower into the ocean. "No," she half-choked. Perspiration
 dripped down her forehead. Her heart pounded. With each beat, the tingling in her numb fingertips lessened as the power receded. She swiped trickling blood from her nose. A strong hand yanked her off the deck and she gazed into her father's menacing glare. "You failed. Again." Her lower lip trembled and she blinked back tears of failure and fear. He shook his head and released her as if he couldn't bear to touch her. The fire's glow glistened off the heavy gold rings, adorning his fat clenched fingers. "Capt'n, they're here," Spencer yelled. "'Tis the Fiery Damsel." "I can see, you half-wit," her father shouted. Hannah swallowed. The bowsprit, headed right for them, but rather than ramming them, the ship edged closer, coming parallel. "Prepare to be boarded." John bellowed. Pirates waved swords over their heads and shook their fists. "Prepare to die," they jeered. Crackling flames shined on their merciless faces. She gasped. Had she imagined it? Was the moonlight and fire playing tricks? She shook her head and stared again. No, it couldn't be. No man had glowing red eyes. The Dolphin's crew drew their swords and aimed pistols. John yelled, "Death to pirates." "Damn it, Hannah," her father clutched her arm. "We are all dead, thanks to you." Hannah slumped and hung her head. Why did her powers fail her when she needed them most? "Hannah, they're coming." Sally clutched Hannah and pulled her towards the stern. "We have got to get out of here. Oh my Lord, what are they?" "Aft boarders," a voice shouted. Pirates swung grappling hooks, latching onto and pulling the sinking Dolphin toward their ship. Fists and swords lifted high overhead, the pirates jumped across the railings and landed on the deck. The Dolphin swayed and a crack split wider. Sharp jagged planks lifted into the air. Hannah took a step backwards. Red eyes glaring, the marauders opened their mouths, the flames exposing sharp pointed teeth. Her heart quickened, blood thumping between her temples. What the hell were they? "To the death," John yelled. Blood and gunpowder smeared his cheeks and his once white shirt. He waved his sword over his head and gripped a pistol in his other hand. The crew followed him. Hannah grabbed one of the Dolphin's wooden belaying pins, determined to bash in a pirate's head. John charged the first pirates. Bald and more than a foot shorter than John, a pirate advanced, his gut hanging over his breeches. The pirate aimed his pistol, but John fired first, hitting the man in the chest. He flew backwards, landing flat on his back. Another taller and muscular marauder jumped in front of John and their swords clashed. John lunged, forcing the pirate against the railing. The fallen pirate sat up, a red trail leaking down the middle of his chest and onto the deck of the ship. He jumped to his feet and Hannah blinked. She shook her head to free it from the fogging effects of the smoke. Had she just seen him jump or had he floated off the deck? The fiend or pirate or monster--whatever ’twas lunged for John. "John, watch out," Hannah yelled, but a cannon blast blocked out her voice. The bald man seized John's neck and jerked him backwards, lifting him off his feet. John stabbed the man in the thigh, but the fiend held on to John, snatching a fistful of John's hair, and yanked, stretching, exposing his neck. The fiend opened his mouth wide, biting into John's throat with his sharp teeth. A squirting stream of crimson splattered onto the wet deck. The other pirate knocked John's sword out of his flailing hand, but with his other hand, John fired his pistol, hitting the man in the chest. The man snarled and seized John's wrist. He tore into the flesh with his teeth, knocking the pistol out of John's hand. John struggled, his free hand pushed on the bald man's chin, but to Hannah's horror, John's eyes closed and his hand fell limp to his side. Sally screamed and ran for the stern. "Sally," Hannah tried to grab her frightened maid, but failed. Something whisked over Hannah's head. Long coats billowing behind them, two pirates descended onto Sally. One landed in front of her and put his hands on his narrow hips. He tossed his dark head back and laughed. Sally whipped around only to be caught short by another broad shouldered blond pirate, who grabbed her. Her hat fell to her side and her long blonde tresses fell loose. "Ah, a woman," he sneered. "Is your last name Knight?"

Guida, ML. A Pirate's Curse: Paranormal Historical Vampire Pirate Romance (Legends of the Soaring Phoenix Book 1) (pp. 1-10). Buffalo Mountain Press. Kindle Edition. 

Sally shrieked as he yanked her close to chest. "Answer me, bitch," he snarled. Hannah gripped the belaying pin tighter in her hand. She took a step closer and opened her mouth to point out the bastard's mistake, but a strong hand covered her lips and grabbed her waist. She stomped on a foot, slammed the wooden pin down on a thigh and received a muffled curse. She knew the voice and shrank. Her father hissed, "Stupid girl,--'tis me. Stop struggling. Don't say a word. They're hunting us. They want to take us to their leader Zu something." She stiffened. Why would anyone be hunting them? Who is this Zu person? "Let me go," Sally pounded her fists on the pirate's chest. "No, I'm Sally. Please leave me alone. Release me." "Then die," he said and bent his head down. Her small hands pushed on the man's chest. The other pirate caught Hannah's eye, an evil smile spreading across his face. He nodded in her direction and marched toward them. He opened his mouth. Moonlight glittered off rows of shark's teeth. Hunger reflected in those eyes. Death rushed toward them. Her father pushed her to the side and aimed his pistol at him. She raised the pin, her hand trembling. "Run," a male voice ordered. Behind them, Spencer aimed the long gun and fired. The cannonball soared through the air and collided into the dark hair pirate, knocking him into the water. Spencer's terrified yell grabbed Hannah's attention. She turned. Two pirates had dragged him to the ground. One bit into his neck, while the other fed on his arm. "Help me," Spencer moaned, his eyes pleading. Hannah inhaled deeply, air filling her lungs. She swallowed hard. The power swelled inside her as she stared at the long gun. She lifted one hand and aimed it at the gun while the other clutched the pin. The same flutter pounded in her chest, her fingers tingled. A white light swirled around the long gun, inching it around and aiming at the pirate sucking on Spencer's arm. Her father grabbed her arm. "Hold your breath." "What? No, please..." Her father dragged her to the railing and tossed her over. Arms and legs kicking, she plunged into the churning black water. Salt burned her eyes. Cold gripped her and her clothes pulled her down. She gulped more and more and more seawater. She kicked her legs hard and skimmed her arms back and forth over the churning surface, trying to keep her head above the water. She grabbed a piece of wreckage and clung to its splintered surface. Bits of burning wood fell into the water. The fiery ship cast an eerie glow onto the water. Hannah and her father swam into the shadow of the hull. Death shrieks from the crew tore at her heart and she bit back a sob. What had Father done? She could have saved Spencer. Spencer had risked his life to save them. He was her friend and didn't deserve to die. Her fingers clutched the wood. She wanted to help and her father stopped her. Why? Didn't he care about his crew? Her father swam toward her, gripping a piece of drifting wood. Glaring at him, she spat out seawater. "Why didn't you let me save him?" He narrowed his eyes. "Because you'd have failed." She turned away and swallowed hard, tears filling in her eyes. The familiar hollow pain in her chest sucked away her breath. Her father's lack of faith in her cut her deep. He bragged about her two older sisters, Theresa and Jessica, about their marriages, their God fearing life, but when it came to her, he never uttered one word of praise. "But...," she stammered. "Are you daft girl? The pirates were searching for us. They knew our name." Her teeth chattered. "How did they know our names?" "I have no idea," he grumbled. Bubbles formed near the bowline, and Hannah held her breath. A dark head peered out of the water. But how could it be? Spencer had shot him and he'd fallen overboard. The bastard should be dead. The man tossed his head back, his wet hair slapping behind him. As he flew into the air, he transformed into a large bat. The size of a muskrat, he had webbed wings, smooth pointed ears and a flattened and pushed up snout. He spun around and around, screeching. He flew high into the air and circled the glowing moon. Hannah covered her mouth and bit her palm, and lost her grip on the drifting wood and slipped into the cold ocean. Sucking in water, her lungs burned. She kicked her feet and burst out of the water. Spitting out the sea, she reached for the driftwood and scanned the sky. The flying bat pirate descended onto the ship. Terrified screams echoed as the marauders tossed dead crew men over the side. Bodies fell, slapping water and pushing Hannah around. Tears slipped down her cheeks. Her lips trembled. She should have held onto the mast and repaired it, giving them a chance to maneuver the ship, instead of giving into her fear. More bats circled the ship. Flames rose high, illuminating the ocean. Any minute the bastards would spot her and her father. A cannonball hit the second mast and it broke into two. A piece of the mast rushed toward her father. "Father," she yelled. He glanced up and tried to swim, but the mast hit him with a solid thump. A splatter of blood smearing on his right temple, he slumped over the piece of wood. Something bumped into her leg under the water. She hung onto her piece of floating wood, afraid to move as a gray fin glided across the water and edged close to a dead crewman. Sharks. Either way, she had condemned herself and her father to a gruesome death. With a stained dark shirt and blood on his chin, a pirate grabbed a mooring line, stood on the railing of the frigate and pointed. "Capt'n, 'tis the Soaring Phoenix." Another ship sailed toward them. Was it pirates or a rescue? Chapter 2 Captain Kane O'Brien peered through his spyglass aboard the deck of the Soaring Phoenix. "Bloody hell." The waxing moon and blazing firelight lit up the black ocean. The cursed Fiery Damsel loomed over a burning, half submerged flute ship, slowly circling its broken mast. Water spilled into cannonball-size holes. Fire licked the white sails, and wood crackled and snapped. He gritted his teeth. A red-headed giant towered over the terrified sailors. His beard hid his face and his eyes burned red. Quinton Palmer. The sailors had the same look of horror when he met Palmer. 'Twas during the Irish Confederate War. He'd have been sixteen years old, a whelp, when Quinton Palmer forced him to become a man. Kane's hero had always been his father, Finn O'Brien, an honorable and courageous man. And Finn O'Brien relished freedom. When the British approached their home town of Wexford, burning their fields and homes, taking their livestock and raping their women, Finn rallied the men in the village to fight. Kane and his father had hid behind an overturned wagon. Shells exploded around them. Kane shrank. Smoke stung his eyes. He peered around a spinning wagon wheel. An Irish setter limped out onto the road. A beast of British soldier, Palmer, held a bayonet in his hand and a sick smile crossed his face. Ten years old, Michael O'Shay, ran over to the dog, screaming. He wrapped his arms around the dying dog's neck. Palmer stabbed little Michael in the shoulder. Michael yelped, releasing the dog. Blood streamed down his chest. The dog snapped and growled. Palmer flicked the bayonet, slicing the dog's throat and the animal collapsed onto the road, blood pooling around him. Palmer's cruelty had sickened Kane and bile rose up his throat. He gripped his sword, but his legs refused to move. His heart pounded and sweat drenched his back. "Kane," his father ordered. "I want you to remain here. Do you hear me, lad?" He gripped Kane's shoulder and shook him. Kane nodded as shells exploded around them, ringing his ears. Kane had swallowed his fright. "Aye, Pa." Raising a cutlass over his head, Finn O'Brien charged Palmer. Palmer took a step back, but whipped out his pistol and fired. His father staggered, but regained his step. Palmer was almost a head taller than his father, but Finn O'Brien never shied away from a fight. Palmer fired again, but this time, his father spun around and fell on his knees. Palmer raised his bayonet. Kane had forgotten his fear. He screamed a war cry, running with his sword high over his head. But his legs failed to move fast enough. The blasts of cannons blocked out his yells. Sweat dripped in his eyes and bile burned in his gut. Staring at Kane, Palmer stabbed his father in the heart. His father fell onto his back, his eyes staring into the sky. Palmer smiled, threw his bayonet onto Kane's father's lifeless body and jerked out his sword. He lunged, knocking Kane's sword out of his hand and grabbing his hair. He threw Kane down next to his dead father and raised his sword. Kane sucked in his breath. He was dead. "Something to remember me by boy," Palmer promised. He slashed Kane's face. Pain slid over him. He'd never forgotten Palmer's promise, or his cruelty, or his smile. Kane fingered his bumpy scar on his left cheek. Hate boiled inside him as Palmer spoke to a man. The terrified lad shook his head. Angered, Palmer slammed the man into the nearest mast. The poor fellow slapped at Palmer's hands, but Palmer crooked the man's head to the side and sank his bloodstained teeth into his throat. Kane shoved the spy glass back into his breeches. "What the devil are you up to Palmer?" "Och, may the devil take Palmer, but I don't have to tell you that Capt'n." Kane's best friend and boatswain, Sean Mallory, slapped the railing. He'd been with Kane through the Irish Confederate War. Despite his angelic face and long blond hair, his towering stature intimidated Sassenachs, like an avenging archangel. "He wants something." "How do you know?" Kane gritted his teeth. "Because Palmer never asks his victims anything before he kills them. Prepare to board 'er. Ready the guns." "Aye, aye, Capt'n," Sean called over his shoulders. "Ready the guns. Prepare
 to board 'er." Footsteps pounded on the deck as Kane's crew rushed to their stations. Kane gripped the bow railing. Acid pitted in his gut. "Revenge is mine, Palmer." The Soaring Phoenix sailed steadfast and true, the crew ready to board the Fiery Damsel. Kane pulled out his sword and pistol. "Fire!" Kane shouted as the Soaring Phoenix closed in on the Fiery Damsel. Cannons thundered and hit the hull of the Damsel's starboard side. The circling bats sped towards the Phoenix, but then landed on the Damsel, changing back into men. "Ahoy, Capt'n, off the starboard bow. 'Tis a lad and a man!" Amadi shouted. Kane glanced up at the crow's nest where Amadi pointed. Night or day, he swore Amadi possessed eagle eyes whether man or vampire. Amadi pointed at some broken wood, but Kane peered closer. Two figures clutched two pieces of drift wood. Palmer must be losing his touch. Palmer ran to the side of the sinking ship. He jumped into the air and dove toward the man and the lad. Without thinking, Kane called upon his vampire powers, leaped into the air and the condensing sensation of his body shrinking, his muscles contracting and his bones shortening, shot through him. Kane's arms transformed into wings, his vision grew keener, and his body shifted into a large bat. Lucky he was able to transform. Sometimes the waxing moon allowed him to use his vampire powers. If it had been a crescent moon or a half moon, he'd never been able to call forth his powers and the victims would be good as dead. Although he was immortal, he didn't have the ability to fight Palmer when Palmer was at full strength. "Capt'n," Amadi yelled. "No." More crewmen joined in the protest, but Kane ignored them. He wanted to foil Palmer's bloodlust. He sped toward Palmer. The lad ducked under water, but the larger, swag-bellied man remained slumped over a piece of wood. Inches away from the man, Palmer skimmed the water and soared into the sky. As he whirled around, Kane collide with him, wrapping his wings around Palmer's body, trapping Palmer's wings. Kane bit the back of Palmer's neck. Palmer screeched and arched his back, but Kane held on. The ocean, night sky and ships swirled around as they plunged into the warm water the way sea eagles clash over prey. Palmer arched again and broke free. He whirled around and bit Kane's wing, tearing his flesh. Pain seized Kane and he sucked in sea water. Palmer soared out of the water. Ignoring the blinding pain, Kane darted into the air and pursued him. Cannons thundered. A cannonball whisked towards him. Kane darted to the left, narrowly missing the shell. "Captain," Amadi shouted. "What the blazes are you doing?" Sean cried. Others joined Amadi and Sean into yelling at him to return to the Soaring Phoenix. Palmer glided towards the Fiery Damsel. Blood dripped onto the ocean. Damn! If Kane chased him onto his ship, Palmer's men would not hesitate to sever his head and he'd join the floating corpses. A movement in the water caught his eyes. Damn sharks. The pain throbbed in his wing. He turned around and headed back to the Soaring Phoenix. Kane spread his wings wide, landed on the deck, and transformed back into a man. He half smiled at the holes marring the hull of the Fiery Damsel as she turned and headed back out to sea. Sean stood there with his arms crossed over his chest. "Capt'n, what the devil were you thinking?" Kane rubbed his throbbing shoulder. "Denying Palmer his pleasure." "Orders Capt'n," Sean cocked his eyebrow. "Lower the longboat," he ordered. "Have Doc go. One of the survivors appears to be injured." "Aye, aye, Capt'n," Sean nodded. The Fiery Damsel steered away, leaving a bloody mess. Kane narrowed his eyes. One day, he'd have his revenge. Revenge would be to force Palmer to fight like a man, sever his head, and tear out his black heart. Amadi, and Doc, their ship's surgeon, rowed towards the lad and man. A gray fin glided through the water. The lad's eyes grew huge as the shark came, closer and closer and closer. The shark bit into a corpse, severing an arm. The black ocean turned red. Doc grabbed the lad and jerked him into the boat. Another predator skimmed the side, and the boat rocked. "Bloody hell," Kane spat. "Help him." The lad pointed at the man still clinging to a piece of the broken mast. "Please help my father." The flute ship cracked and groaned as the bow broke off and sank into the ocean. Fiery sails and pieces of the ship fell into the sea. A wave rolled up, the man slammed into the longboat, hitting his head on the starboard side with a solid bang. His eyes fell closed, and he released the driftwood. Kane grimaced. With his huge plump lifeless body, the man outweighed his men by a hundred pounds. Doc seized the man's coat and yanked. "Help me, Amadi." Amadi grabbed underneath the man's right arm and pulled while Doc clutched his other arm. Another shark had joined the first and with each pass, they inched closer to the lad's father. The man slipped out of Amadi's hand and splashed into to the ocean. Kane sucked in his breath. "No!" the lad screamed. "Amadi, Doc, look out!" Kane cried out. A fin headed straight for the half submerged fat man. Kane yanked out his pistol, fired and hit the fin. Blood seeped down the fin and the fin disappeared into the water. Amadi gripped the man's shoulder and Doc seized the man's thigh as the men stood and heaved the man onto the rocking boat. "Get out of there," Kane waved his arm. Amadi and Doc rowed the boat back to the Soaring Phoenix. Doc seized the lad and pushed him at the ladder. The

Guida, ML. A Pirate's Curse: Paranormal Historical Vampire Pirate Romance (Legends of the Soaring Phoenix Book 1) (pp. 10-20). Buffalo Mountain Press. Kindle Edition. 

The pain throbbed in his wing. He turned around and headed back to the Soaring Phoenix. Kane spread his wings wide, landed on the deck, and transformed back into a man. He half smiled at the holes marring the hull of the Fiery Damsel as she turned and headed back out to sea. Sean stood there with his arms crossed over his chest. "Capt'n, what the devil were you thinking?" Kane rubbed his throbbing shoulder. "Denying Palmer his pleasure." "Orders Capt'n," Sean cocked his eyebrow. "Lower the longboat," he ordered. "Have Doc go. One of the survivors appears to be injured." "Aye, aye, Capt'n," Sean nodded. The Fiery Damsel steered away, leaving a bloody mess. Kane narrowed his eyes. One day, he'd have his revenge. Revenge would be to force Palmer to fight like a man, sever his head, and tear out his black heart. Amadi, and Doc, their ship's surgeon, rowed towards the lad and man. A gray fin glided through the water. The lad's eyes grew huge as the shark came, closer and closer and closer. The shark bit into a corpse, severing an arm. The black ocean turned red. Doc grabbed the lad and jerked him into the boat. Another predator skimmed the side, and the boat rocked. "Bloody hell," Kane spat. "Help him." The lad pointed at the man still clinging to a piece of the broken mast. "Please help my father." The flute ship cracked and groaned as the bow broke off and sank into the ocean. Fiery sails and pieces of the ship fell into the sea. A wave rolled up, the man slammed into the longboat, hitting his head on the starboard side with a solid bang. His eyes fell closed, and he released the driftwood. Kane grimaced. With his huge plump lifeless body, the man outweighed his men by a hundred pounds. Doc seized the man's coat and yanked. "Help me, Amadi." Amadi grabbed underneath the man's right arm and pulled while Doc clutched his other arm. Another shark had joined the first and with each pass, they inched closer to the lad's father. The man slipped out of Amadi's hand and splashed into to the ocean. Kane sucked in his breath. "No!" the lad screamed. "Amadi, Doc, look out!" Kane cried out. A fin headed straight for the half submerged fat man. Kane yanked out his pistol, fired and hit the fin. Blood seeped down the fin and the fin disappeared into the water. Amadi gripped the man's shoulder and Doc seized the man's thigh as the men stood and heaved the man onto the rocking boat. "Get out of there," Kane waved his arm. Amadi and Doc rowed the boat back to the Soaring Phoenix. Doc seized the lad and pushed him at the ladder. The lad hesitated and glanced at his father. "Move," Doc said. He pulled out his pistol and pointed. The lad's eyes widened. He grabbed the rope ladder and climbed. Terror reflected in that cherub face. The lad's shirt swallowed his slender frame and a rope, wrapped around his waist twice, held his two sizes too big breeches. He folded his arms across his chest and stared at the railing. He stood on his tip toes, no doubt waiting eagerly for his father. Kane gazed at the lad. Something wasn't right. He just couldn't put a finger on it. Amadi appeared over the railing and glared at Doc. "Help me fool. He weighs more than a bloated whale." Doc grabbed one of the man's arms as Amadi, pale and sweat pouring down his temples, grunted and pushed the fat unconscious man onto the ship. "'Twas a heavy one, Capt'n." He tossed the man onto the deck, bent over and put his hands on his knees. The man's knee length blue woolen coat and dark breeches stuck to his stout body. Thick salt and pepper black hair clung to his head like an octopus perching on top of a white clam. A gold chain with a ruby pendent hung around his double chin. Kane rubbed his chin. The Captain? Or some wealthy merchant? Amadi exhaled and stood. He rubbed the back of his neck. "Twas a grand job, Amadi." Kane half smiled. Amadi was the strongest man aboard the ship and could lift three or four barrels full of rum over his head without breaking a sweat. The rich Sassenach was lucky. Amadi carried him, or he'd be a feast for the hungry beasts. "Did you see any other survivors, Doc?" Kane asked. "No, Cap'n," Doc shook his head, his face grim. "All dead." Hannah winced at those words and released a half sob. Her fault. Her powers failed her. She should have stopped the mast from crashing into the ocean or shielded the ship from the ramming cannonballs or increased the ship's speed. Her grandmother would have, but she wasn't Grandmother. The Captain called his attention to a blond man. The wind blew his thick sun streaked hair curling around his massive shoulders and opened his shirt, revealing a chiseled chest covered with curly golden hair. His trousers outlined his firm buttocks and sold thighs. He was too pretty, like an archangel. "Mallory, how long until we reach Tortuga?" Tortuga? A pirate's heaven. They'd be sold into slavery or worse. "Don't worry Capt'n." The suave man smiled as he slapped his thigh with his left hand. "Blimey, may I sink and perish in blood if I canna get us in a fortnight." From where he laid sprawled out on the deck, her father groaned. Hannah rushed over, sank down beside him and with a trembling hand, she patted his face. "Wake up, father." His pale skin and white lips terrified her. Breathe. She put her hand on his chest and his chest rose up and down. She sighed with relief. Good, he was alive. Her hair fell across her face. She straightened, shoved the strands from her face, and leaned over again. But the unruly hair slapped right back down over her cheeks. Curious male faces stared at her. Pirates. Her freezing fingers gripped her father's shirt and she shook him. Wake up. Footsteps echoed behind her. She froze. She glanced over her shoulder. Her gaze travelled up muscular legs, narrow hips, and broad shoulders. She had to tilt her head to see into his face. Her heart silenced. Dark green eyes held her gaze. The man's long black hair hung past his broad shoulders. His white shirt opened to the navel and his black breeches clung to his muscular legs. He had a pistol stuck into his belt on one hip and a sword in his sheath on the other. 'twas Lucifer himself. A breeze rushed over her and her damp clothes clung to her wet skin. Her teeth chattered, and her skin chilled. "Welcome aboard the Soaring Phoenix, lad." The captain grinned, revealing a single dimple on his left cheek. She exhaled and lowered her shaking hand. Her disguise worked. For once in her life, she listened to her father, and he had been right. "Take the lad and this man below. Give 'em some dry clothes. Bring 'em back up here. I want a word with 'em," the captain said. The melodic Irish timbre rolled off the devil's lips. No menace echoed in his voice, but then, he didn't know she played a trick on him either. Wait, what did he want to talk to her about? Maybe he did suspect the truth? "Aye, Aye, Capt'n," a clean-shaven pirate near her answered. Shirtless, he was bald and wore a black eye patch over his left eye. He was a little smaller than the Captain, but his sculpted muscles rivaled that of his captain. He had on red breeches, his sword and pistol hung off his black belt. Hannah jumped at a pirate's loud voice. Before she knew what was happening, the same man grabbed her with ironclad hands, lifted her off the deck, wrapped his arm around her waist and held her snug next to his muscular body. She broke out in a cold sweat and her heart thumped harder. Her fingertips turned numb. She kicked her feet and pounded her fists on his hard thighs and abdomen, but he captured one wrist, his hand a steal manacle. She winced. "The devil with you boy, don't make me lose my temper," he said. "I'm not gonna hurt ya." Clenching her fists, she glared up at him. She gritted her teeth. Why did her wrist throb then? In front of her, the same two men, Doc, wearing a red bandana over his dark black hair and Amadi, the tallest black man she had ever seen, who rescued them earlier, lifted her father. "Damn," Doc said, "he's breaking my arms." Amadi with his long dark multiple braids woven with gold beads, grasped father's ankles and grunted. "Quit your bellyaching Doc. You didn't have to carry the bastard up a rope ladder." The deeper they went into the ship's dim interior, the air changed from clean and fresh to stale and musty. The men grunted and groaned carrying her father. With their tormented and sweating faces and strained muscles, they managed not to drop him. At the bottom of the stairs, her captor set her on her feet. Rows of hammocks swung between beams from one side of the room to the other. She rubbed her cold arms and took a step away from him. Now what? He studied her. "Cook will bring you some dry clothes." She folded her arms across her chest. Doc and Amadi hoisted her father into a swinging hammock. Her father sighed as if he was in a restful sleep. How could he sleep though this? Was he faking? "Thanks, Michael," Amadi said. "You must be getting soft in your old age, Amadi." Michael slapped him on the shoulder and grinned. Amadi put his large hands on his wide hips and braced his shoulders. His green vest revealed a chiseled chest and a flat stomach. Black breeches fitted his long, muscular legs. His head brushed the top of the ceiling. She swallowed hard. She had never seen such a tall black man. He looked like he could break her in two with one hand. "Don't push your luck, boy," Amadi glowered at Michael. "You didn't have to carry dis gent up a rope ladder." "D'ye now?" Michael shrugged his shoulders. "True enough, I take your point." Glancing over at Doc, he motioned. "Come on." He nodded. "Topside." A gruff, wizened man with a white beard and shoulder length gray hair leaned against the door. "You lads are as weak as a new babe if you can't lift such a wee man." Amadi sauntered over. "Don't make me mad, Cook." The old man gave him a lopsided grin. "Get
 out of here ye wee lass." Amadi stormed out of the room. His angry footsteps pounded on the stairs. Michael pushed past Cook while Doc bumped his shoulder, but Cook only cackled. Hannah would have wet her breeches if those pirates slammed into her shoulder. Cook flashed his gaze over her. Chuckling, he strolled to a large trunk against a wall and opened it. After searching through it, he grabbed a white shirt and pair of black breeches and put them on the nearest hammock. "These are too big for ye lad, but they're dry. I'll be back to take you to the Capt'n." Hannah waited until she could no longer hear Cook's footsteps before she tore off her shirt and breeches. The faint glow of the lantern revealed the top of her mounds peering over the wooly bandage. She tried shoving the mounds back down, but the bandage had shrunk. Her cheeks burned. She was a stone's throw from being a pirate's concubine. Her hand clenched the flimsy wet material. She wanted to rip it off, but what if the Captain ordered her to take the shirt off? She'd have nothing underneath. Her hands dropped to her side. Trapped in a shark-infested cove. She snatched the shirt and slipped her hand through one sleeve. Silk and warmth caressed her clammy skin, chasing away the cold. Her shaking hands retied her soaking hair, and she glanced down. Could she pass for a cabin boy? She put on her best scowl and clenched her fists. Hannah blinked back tears. If only, she had a better handle on her powers, she might be able to get her and her father out of this mess, but she had failed last night to save her crew. 'Twas her fault everybody died. Why would today be any different? She slumped onto the hard oak floor. The sole lantern in the room dimly lit the corridor and black shadows flickered on the wall like bats. Looming, twirling, menacing. She frowned and huddled her knees against her chest. She leaned her head back against the wall. Not real. Not real. Not real. Footsteps shuffled down the hallway. A large billowy shadow drifted along the wall. Fear shot through her and pooled at the bottom of her toes. She jumped to her feet, rushed to her father and dug her fingers into his shoulders. She shook him. Not doing this alone. Her father snorted and spit flew into her mouth. She gagged and slapped him across the face. "Father, wake up!" He groaned, his eyes fluttered, but remained closed. "Father, please wake up." She leaned over and whispered into his ear. "We're aboard a pirate ship, get up. Someone's coming to take us

Guida, ML. A Pirate's Curse: Paranormal Historical Vampire Pirate Romance (Legends of the Soaring Phoenix Book 1) (pp. 18-25). Buffalo Mountain Press. Kindle Edition. 
START HERE
A cannonball hits the water astern of your ship's hull. The resulting splash soaks your clothing. You drag your sleeve across your forehead, succeeding only in spreading the water around. 

Your ship's last loaded cannon fires, fouling the air with smoke and brimstone. Luckily, the cannon didn't explode. Unfortunately, your cannonball also missed—and now you're out of gunpowder.

The flag on the ship trading fire with you bears a skull and crossbones with a rose clutched in its grinning teeth. It's the flag of Captain Adelaide Briar.

  Being stuck in port also means that you're once again subjected to the irritating rumor-mongering of your former captain Blackguard, who continues to try to undermine you in the eyes of your crew and the citizens of San Alfonso.
    At this point, however, your reputation outweighs his. You no longer have anything to fear from him, at least as far as your reputation is concerned.
    Despite everything else you've been through, that wretch can continue to tarnish your reputation and hinder your quest toward fame. The lout. One day you'll have your revenge.
          Though you work together, you get the sense that Tinima doesn't consider you friends. You're her boss, and she follows your orders, but she's probably not one of your crew members who will help spread your reputation at the taverns.
          Still, when you ask to spend time with her, she welcomes the opportunity to weigh in on some of your decisions as captain.        
          Tinima is content enough to spend more time with you, particularly when you pay for her hot chocolate. She's comfortable enough with you that she's at ease in your conversations, and is certainly willing to argue with you when she thinks you're wrong.
        After the incident with the ghost ship, there's a growing discontent among the pirates who frequent San Alfonso about how the Pirate King is keeping the seas open for the business of piracy. That his true identity is unknown is a bone of contention, and more and more people are wondering if it isn't time for a new Pirate King. Anne Read is, of course, doing everything she can to fuel these assertions.
        There are few people you can talk to about this topic without potentially damaging your reputation or undermining your authority among your crew. Tinima is one of them. And though at first she seems disinclined to discuss politics, your insistence on her opinion seems to release a bucket of crabs as she airs her concerns about your decisions as captain.
			
              As she begins to discuss her concerns, you're relieved to hear that all of them are nitpicks or troubles among your crew that you hadn't yet recognized. She's got a good eye for how people interact, a skill you never realized you could enlist to help keep your crew content. You almost want to take notes, but you can always ask Tinima for reminders once you're back on the ship.

                        You spend the rest of the day together, avoiding talk of politics and work, wandering the bazaar and the university, stealing moments of privacy in the middle of crowds and making a game of your courtship. As night falls, she leads you back to her cottage, still well kept despite all your time at sea. She guides you into her bed for a night spare on sleep but full of pleasure.
                 
        Caesar is more than willing to help you work on your combat, and his fighting prowess is as much ahead of yours as it always has been. But it seems your first mate has a secondary agenda: he wants to discuss some of the issues he has with the way you captain your ship, and for you to get his training, you'll first have to hear him out.
          Though you've been through a lot together over the years, you get the sense that Caesar doesn't consider you a friend any longer. You've become his boss, and he follows your orders, but he's probably not one of your crew members who help spread your reputation at the taverns.
          Still, when you ask to spend time with him, he welcomes the opportunity to weigh in on some of your decisions as captain.
          Caesar is content enough to spend more time with you, reminiscing about the good old days that weren't all that good, and discussing your latest adventures. You've been friends long enough that, though he bites his tongue when you're out at sea, when you're in port he has no fear of arguing with you on points he doesn't agree with.
           decisionscaesar
      To ask his opinion on politics.
        After the incident with the ghost ship, there's a growing discontent among the pirates who frequent San Alfonso about how the Pirate King is keeping the seas open for the business of piracy. That his true identity is unknown is a bone of contention, and more and more people are wondering if it isn't time for a new Pirate King. Anne Read is, of course, doing everything she can to fuel these assertions.
		
        There are few people you can talk to about this topic without potentially damaging your reputation or undermining your authority among your crew. Caesar is one of them. He's not typically that interested in local gossip or high-level discussion about who ought to be in charge of ports or pirates, believing that the most relevant decisions are made by captain and crew. Still, when you ask, he's ready to weigh in—particularly on the specifics of your own decisions as captain.
         decisionscaesar
		
         caesar 30
        You head down to a place that Caesar prefers for breakfast; it's on the outskirts of San Alfonso, and it's really just a couple of tables set up under an awning attached to a family's house. Their chorizo is excellent, and one of the children must have knack with cambiar, as demonstrated in the piraguas—crushed ice with flavored syrup—the family serves even in the heat and humidity of hurricane season. It's delicious, and the place is private enough for real conversation. As soon as your food appears, Caesar begins expressing his concerns.
		
         ruthless > 50
          "You and I don't see eye-to-eye about how you treat the crew," he says, stating what you both already know. "You lead through fear, just like Blackguard tried to rule us. I didn't appreciate it then, and I worry it will get you—all of us—into trouble if someone decides it's worth challenging your authority."
		  
           caesargoodwill
           greed > 70
            He leans back in his chair. "On the other hand, I respect the way you strive to make all of us richer. I don't love that you sacrifice others for that greed on occasion, but I do understand it. And, frankly, we all benefit, so it's a minor concern, nothing more."
			
             caesarcrown
             ((patron) or (patronlie))
              He lets a bite of piragua melt in his mouth, looking almost thoughtful, before he says what's really on his mind. "I am concerned," he says slowly, "with your apparent opinion of the Crown." You're far enough on the outskirts of San Alfonso to speak of the Crown openly, but Caesar still looks to see if the family is within earshot. You glance as well, because open discussion of the Crown is never something to take lightly. "I don't trust the Crown," he says. "They'll happily play us against each other until the end of time, and then tie nooses around our necks at the least provocation. If they don't impress us into service first, and I'm not sure that option is better."
              
                I try to convince him of the value of a letter of marque.
                   caesar -15
                   privateer 25
                  Caesar is right. It's not as if the Crown treats its own people all that well. But their patronage offers you the opportunity to become a legitimate captain, a citizen with legal standing. 
				  
                  "If you can trust them to follow through," Caesar reminds you. "And if you can trust them to really treat the likes of us as citizens. And if you want to give up San Alfonso as it is now."
				  
                  You acknowledge his points, but your heart is still set on leaving piracy for a respectable captaincy one day, and the chance of settling somewhere if life at sea loses its charm. Maybe one day you and Caesar will see eye-to-eye, but it won't be today.
				
                   piratekingcaesar
                I explain I'm using the Crown to get ahead.
                   privateer -25
                  "I'm not loyal to the Crown," you assure him. "I'm happy to use an alliance with them so long as they can make me—us—stronger. And if they'll fund us, then I'll do a little work for them, until I'm in a position to leave them behind."
				  
                  He looks away from you and into the forest rising into the mountains behind you. "It's a dangerous gamble. I hope it pays out."
				  
                  You grin. "How often do I take a gamble that doesn't?"
				  
                  His eyebrow raises on its own, and he looks back at you. "Do you want a full listing, from the time you were a swab?"
				  
                   piratekingcaesar
                I don't care who I work for, as long as they pay.
                   greed 30
                  He flashes a smile. "There is that. So long as we get paid and not hanged in the end."
				  
                   piratekingcaesar
                 (patronlie) I explain that my agreement is a ruse.
                   privateer -25
                  "I never intended to work for the Crown," you explain, "but Joaquin may well feed us information on what the Crown is doing. Can you imagine how useful that information could be to the Pirate King?"
				  
                  He smirks. "This Pirate King or the next one?"

                  Which neatly turns
                   piratekingcaesar2
                I empathize, but explain that working with the Crown helps us protect the innocent.
                   privateer 10
                   greed -10
                   ruthless -10
                  "I certainly have no desire to be impressed into service," you say, and Caesar lifts his piragua in a toast to that idea. "I don't think they're right about everything, Caesar. But can you say that the Pirate King—or the independent pirates of the Lucayan—have the best interests of the people—or even their crews—in mind?" He looks down, and you can see him thinking of those bad days under Blackguard. "I want to stop the villains who go after innocent merchants; and that means siding with the Crown. I want to protect the people from ghost ships. I want to be someone who does good in the world and on the sea. That doesn't mean I want to help the Crown colonize anyone, but I do want to stop anyone who makes it their goal to bring harm to others."
				  
                  Caesar looks up and smirks at you. "I thought I was the idealist," he says quietly.
				  
                  "You are," you say. "That's why we get along so well."
				  
                  He shakes his head, and you see him mulling over the idea like you've watched him go over your accounts, making sure each crew member gets exactly their fair share. You don't think you've convinced him, but at least he understands where you're coming from.

                   piratekingcaesar
            
               caesar 25
              As he begins to discuss his concerns, you're relieved to hear that all of them are nitpicks, usually having to do with his sense for the crew's comradeship and their morale. Caesar has always had a better sense for the crew than you, given that he handles the contracts; you listen attentively, making some notes about shift changes you'll have to implement when you're back at sea. But it's nothing dramatic, and you feel confident you can handle it, and make your first mate feel as though he's impacted your captaincy.
			  
               piratekingcaesar
              Eventually, Caesar brings
               piratekingcaesar2
              the conversation around to the gossip about the Pirate King, the lack of confidence the pirates of San Alfonso are showing in his—mostly absent—leadership, and Anne Read's attempts to further undermine his authority.
		
              "I worry about tempting fate," he says. "The Pirate King has been around for centuries—whether as the same man and spirit or as different pirates who have taken on the title, I'm not sure." He makes a sign to ward off evil. "If there is something unnatural about him, those who speak loudly against him will feel his displeasure, whether through him or his fleet."
			  
              "But they have been absent lately," you point out. "They let us handle the ghost ship."
			  
              Caesar shudders. "They did. A test of your mettle, perhaps?"
               caesarconversation
              
                "So you support the Pirate King?"
                  His brow furrows. "Do you support a rainstorm? An earthquake? The Pirate King is a force of nature, and he doesn't need our support to continue in his role."
                   caesarconversation
                "You think the Pirate King is testing us?"
                  Caesar shrugs. "If it's true that the Pirate King does change identities over the years, he may be testing the mettle of candidates to take on the mantle of his power. Why not you?" 
                   caesarconversation
                "Don't you wonder about the Pirate King's anonymity?"
                  "I think it's necessary," Caesar argues. "I've no quarrel with Anne Read, but I doubt her ability to claim the title and keep herself out of the center of attention. The Pirate King needs discretion, and mystery, if he—or she—is to rule effectively."
                   caesarconversation
                 (caesarromance) "Politics is well and good, but what about us?"
                   caesar > 60
                    Caesar smiles warmly at you, as though he's been waiting for you to broach the topic.
					
                     caesarex
                      "Things didn't go so well for us the last time," he says.
					  
                      "I like to think we've both changed for the better," you say, and he grins.
					  
                      "I'd like to think that, too," he says.
                       caesarsuccess
                       caesarlover true
                       tinimalover
                         poly
                           lover "Caesar and Tinima"
                           caesarlove
                        
                           lover "Caesar, Tinima"
                           caesarlove
                      
                         lover "Caesar Lord"
                         caesarlove
						
                        You spend the rest of the day together, wandering the quieter places just outside San Alfonso, talking of your early days together and the misadventures of youth. As night falls, you find a secluded beach, where, at first, you watch the stars come out, and later, you ignore the stars all together, leaving their cold, impersonal constellations behind for the heat of skin against skin, and for the contrast of the sand and the waves that splash around you far into the night.
                         anneproposition
                    if caesarlover
                       caesarlove
                    
                      "I hope I've made my own feelings clear over time, Captain," Caesar says, reaching for your hand. "However you'll have me, I'm yours."
                       caesarlove
                  
                    Caesar shakes his head. "We go back a long way," he says firmly. "I will always have your back, Captain, and I strive to be a good first mate. But that is all I can be for you."
                     enough2				  
                That's enough politics.
                   enough2
                  You finish your piragua and Caesar tells you he has work to do, looking into new hires and settling a dispute between two of your crew members. And you are, once again, left to your own wiles.
                   anneproposition
          
             caesarcrown
        
           caesargoodwill
       (caesarex) To rekindle our relationship.
         caesarromance true
         decisionscaesar
       (caesarlover) To strengthen our romance.
         caesarromance true
         decisionscaesar
       ((lover="none") and ((caesarsex  false) and ((sexpref  "men") or (sexpref  "both")))) To begin a romance.
         caesarromance true
         decisionscaesar
  I'm studying at la Biblioteca de Alejandro.
     skullduggery 20
    When there's nothing to do, there's always the option of turning to a good book, and the library has many of them. The collection has expanded since you were last stuck in port for any length of time, and you spend time with some adventure novels and a book about improvisational weaponry.
	
    The library is also a good place to hear local gossip. After the incident with the ghost ship, there's a growing discontent among the pirates who frequent San Alfonso about how the Pirate King is keeping the seas open for the business of piracy. That his true identity is unknown is a bone of contention, and more and more people are wondering if it isn't time for a new Pirate King. Anne Read is, of course, doing everything she can to fuel these assertions.
	
    Several locals have been checking out tales of ghost stories in the Lucayan, looking for clues about whether the Pirate King really has been around for hundreds of years. People whisper that he's no man at all, but a spirit, while others insist there's a line of heirs that have taken over the role through the generations. No one seems to have any real conclusions.
     anneproposition
  I'm making business negotiations at the bazaar.
     parley 20
     wealth 100
    Not only is the bazaar a place to solidify your contacts, and your contracts, but also a fantastic place to practice your negotiation skills. You get more adept at getting the best deal, though some of the merchants have been in this line of work for so long that you know they're still making a bigger profit than you are.
	
    The bazaar is an ideal place to pick up local gossip as well. After the incident with the ghost ship, there's a growing discontent among the pirates who frequent San Alfonso about how the Pirate King is keeping the seas open for the business of piracy. That his true identity is unknown is a bone of contention, and more and more people are wondering if it isn't time for a new Pirate King. Anne Read is, of course, doing everything she can to fuel these assertions.
	
    The merchants claim to be unconcerned with these discussions, though you hear some mutter about spirits and about the Pirate King's own immortality. He gave up his soul for eternal youth, you hear. Others say he's merely the most recent in a long line, and each Pirate King has met a terrible and bloody death—hence the reason this one is so secret about his true identity. No one seems to have any real conclusions.
     anneproposition
  I'm watching the shipwrights work on ${flagship}.
     sail 20
    Why?
    
      I want to make sure they're doing their job right.
         sail < 50
          Since you have trouble telling the hull from the broad side of a barn, you're not sure how you're going to determine whether or not they're doing their job correctly, but you're making every effort. And you're learning something along the way. It's not just about how the ship is put together either.
		  
           shipwrightgossip
          The workers are horrible gossips. After the incident with the ghost ship, there's a growing discontent among the pirates who frequent San Alfonso about how the Pirate King is keeping the seas open for the business of piracy. That his true identity is unknown is a bone of contention, and more and more people are wondering if it isn't time for a new Pirate King. Anne Read is, of course, doing everything she can to fuel these assertions.
		  
          The workers tend to be a superstitious lot, eager to condemn Anne Read for her heresy in challenging the Pirate King, whom they claim to be immortal, half-spirit himself.
           flagship  "the [i]Sea Queen[/i]"
            They look over their shoulders at this, eyeing Granny, who is, after all, a full spirit. She blows her pipe smoke at them.
          Some say he sold his soul for eternal youth. But a few of the younger workers claim that the Pirate King is only the most recent in a long line, and that each Pirate King has met a terrible and bloody death—hence the reason this one is so secret about his true identity. No one seems to have any real conclusions.
           anneproposition
        
          You know your way around a ship at least as well as these workers, and from what you can tell, they're doing good work. But despite yourself, you learn something new—though not about how the ship is put together.
		  
           shipwrightgossip
      I'm trying to learn more about ${flagship}'s inner workings.
         sail 10
        The more you can learn about the way your ship is put together, the better you can make her work for you. You're definitely learning more about ${flagship} than you knew from deck. And you're learning about other things, too….
		
         shipwrightgossip
      I'm just bored.
        Luckily, there's more to do than just watch the work.
         shipwrightgossip
       (flagship  "the [i]Sea Queen[/i]") I want to spend some time with Granny O'Malley.
        "How are they treating our girl?" you ask the ghost. The workers shudder, but make no comment; they know where the money comes from.
		
        One of them does jump when Granny appears beside you. "Oh, they're doing well enough, I suppose." She bends down next to one of the workers as he adjusts some of the deck planking. You can almost see the sweat trickling down his neck. "In my day, of course, we wouldn't have dry-docked for something this minor."
		
        You snort. Minor indeed. "You'd rather I take her right back out to sea then?"
		
        "You'll do no such thing," Granny scolds, aghast, and then sees you've needled her right back. "Touché."
		
        You chat about the work, about goings-on in port, and about the Pirate King (who, in Granny's day, was about ten times as powerful, with a fleet a hundred ships and counting; not that you believe her). But the two of you aren't the only ones talking about the Pirate King.
         shipwrightgossip
   (larksaved) I'm seeking out Evan Lark.
     elsabio 20
     larkfriend true
    Whenever you've been back in San Alfonso, you've made a point to seek out Evan Lark, in part to make sure he's recovered from his misadventure. But more because you ended up enjoying his company. For all that he works for El Sabio, he has very continental tastes: he knows the best place in San Alfonso for afternoon tea, for example. And he bakes scones. Bakes. Scones.
	
    They're delicious.
	
    With everyone in San Alfonso talking about the Pirate King, you can hardly avoid the topic. Evan is quick to pooh-pooh nonsense about the Pirate King's fleet being weaker than in previous years. "Just because something is quiet doesn't mean it's not there," he says. "You can be swimming in perfectly calm waters and never hear or see the shark until after it's bitten off your leg."
	
    You shudder at the graphic imagery coming from someone so cultured.
	
    "Then why didn't the Pirate King go after the ghost ship?" you ask.
	
    He shrugs. "I'm just a secretary, of course, so my knowledge of such things is limited." You give him a pointed look—you know very well that he sees most of San Alfonso's business transactions cross his desk. He can make perfectly good guesses about such things. But whatever your opinion on his skills, he ignores the look and continues on. "I do have it on some authority, however, that the Crown was making an attempt at the Somers Islands."
	
    You give a low whistle. "That's the largest independent group of islands in the Lucayan."
	
    He looks into his tea mug to avoid showing his expression, but he's only marginally successful. "I believe there's a reason they still are," he says, but you think that's all he's going to say on that matter.
     anneproposition  
 anneproposition

During your third week stuck in San Alfonso, with no end to your landbound exile from the sea in sight, you're about ready to hire yourself out—and not only from boredom. You're not making any money in port, and the less you have to dip into your savings, the better.
 greed > 50
  Your goal is to amass a fortune, not spend one!
So when you see Anne Read holding court at the Lobo Negro, and she beckons you over, you don't think twice about joining the throng.
 anneally
  Given your current debt to Read, it's not as if you have much choice.

Of course, she takes her own sweet time addressing you after you've joined her. There are ribald jokes, daring stories, and plenty of toasts to her future success as the would-be Pirate King. Eventually, she dismisses her cronies and beckons for you to follow her.

  I treat her as a leader: with respect.
     anneread 25
    She nods at you in acknowledgment. 
     gotajob
    "I've got a job for you. I think it's something you can handle."
	
    An end to the boredom of port? Potential payment? "I can handle whatever it is," you say, and she gives you a wry grin.
     annejob
  I fall into step with her as an equal.
    She quirks an eyebrow at your presumption—she clearly views herself as more important than you. Of course, she views herself as more important than everyone.
     (anneally) or (fame < 30)
       anneread 5
      
      "You think awfully highly of yourself," she says, and you bite your tongue before pointing out that that's the gull calling the albatross white.
	  
      Instead, you counter, "Did you want to talk with me about something? Or were you just eager for my charming company?"
       annejob
    
       anneread 35
       gotajob
   (annesex) I place my hand on the small of her back, like a lover.
    Anne smiles and leans into you. "If only I had time for that tonight, ${firstname}. But I'm afraid I'm all work and no play this evening. Which is what I wanted to talk to you about."
	
    "I'm up for a little work," you say, though you're a bit disappointed your plans for the evening aren't what she had in mind.
     annejob
  I give her a worshipful glance, hoping to stand out among her admirers.
    She rolls her eyes. "No need for that. I'm not short on flattery tonight, and I need you for something that doesn't involve fawning on me, if you can handle that."
	
    "Of course I can," you say quickly.
     annejob

    Anne cracks her knuckles absentmindedly as you walk in the dark warmth of a San Alfonso night. "You know—everyone knows—I'm after becoming Pirate King," she says. "But you can't challenge a ghost or a legend." 
	
    "Have you tried?"
	
    She snorts. "If I could just declare myself Pirate King and have people follow me, don't you think I'd have already done it? No, pirates want proof. The Pirate King's fleet is still out there, even if it hasn't been active near San Alfonso lately. The Crown wants him badly enough he must be causing them trouble, whether we hear about it or not. You hear talk of him in Puerta Ballena, you'd swear he's a demon out to sink every ship in the Crown Navy. Frankly, I think the talk of ghosts and spirits is all wind up the sail. He's no more immortal than you or I. But who is he?"
    
      "Actually, I believe the tales."
        She snorts. "Then perhaps you'll be surprised at what you find out."
         debunk
      "No one really knows."
        "Exactly!" she says. "But I intend to change that."
         debunk
      "There are some contenders…."
        "Right you are," she says agreeably. "The trick is to narrow them down."
         debunk
      "It must be El Sabio. Isn't it obvious?"
        Anne's eyebrows disappear beneath the brim of her hat. "El Sabio? That old bureaucrat?"
		
        "Appearances can be deceiving," you say with a shrug.
		
        She shakes her head. "I can't believe it. Not without more evidence. And that's exactly what I want."
         debunk
		
        She stretches her arms in front of her, fingers interlaced. Her knuckles make a rippling series of pops. "I'd like to offer you a job. I want to know who the Pirate King truly is. And I've heard rumors of an inlet down the coast from here where the Pirate King harbors his ships, outside of the scrutiny of San Alfonso. But the trouble is, no one has been able to actually locate the inlet and return alive."
        
          "What's in it for me?"
             greed 15
            "Gold. My gratitude. Fame." 
             risk
          "Sounds awfully risky."
             risk
           (anneally) "You're the captain, Captain."
            You know an assignment when you hear one. She grins at your willingness to fall into line.
			
            "If only all my captains were so amenable," she says wistfully.
			
             jobprep
           (anneally=false) "Why hire me instead of sending one of your own crew?"
            "Whoever the Pirate King is, he knows very well what I intend," Anne says. "If I send any of my crew investigating, he's sure to find a way to evade—or eliminate—them. But you're a captain of your own ship.
             fleet > 1
              Your own fleet.
            And as far as anyone knows, you're not making your own play for Pirate King."
			
            She waits for you to respond to that bit of information, either confirming or denying, and chuckles when you remain silent on the issue.
			
             risk
            She shrugs. "Either the risk is worth it or it's not. My money is good. Uncovering the true identity of the Pirate King would be its own reward. And when I take his place, I'll remember the people who helped put me there."
             thejob
            
              I'll take the job. I need something to do!
                 jobprep
                Anne moves slightly away from you, digging through her satchel for a map and a small leatherbound book. "This is the research I've put together for the job," she says. "The map is rough, but it's based on the sailing I've done trying to locate the inlet. It should put you in the right direction. Wherever the entry is, there's an illusion covering it from the sea, so you'll have to go on land."
				
                "And the book?" you say.
				
                "Notes. Possible candidates for the identity of the Pirate King. Rumors." She hands you the map and the book, then takes out her pipe from her satchel and lights it. "Mostly bilge water, but there might be a bit of truth in the most ridiculous thing."
				
                The book feels warm between your hands, and the job feels full of potential. "I'll see what I can find out."
				
                Anne, smelling of tobacco and salt, puts her hand on your shoulder. "I knew I could count on you."
                 thequest
              I'll take the job but will decide what to report after I've investigated.
                 hiddenmotive true
                You've no real loyalty to Anne Read. And as for the Pirate King…
                
                  I think it's best not to get on his bad side.
                     privateer -10
                     skullduggery 10
                     jobprep
                   (privateer < 55) He's a thorn to the Crown, so I support him.
                     privateer -20
                     ruthless -10
                     jobprep
                   (privateer > 45) He's a bounty I'd love to turn over to the Crown.
                     privateer 20
                     jobprep
                   (patron) Finding out his identity is exactly what I plan to do for the Crown.
                     privateer 30
                     jobprep
                  I'll replace him myself one day.
                     fame 10
                     greed 10
                     jobprep
               ((annesex) and (caesarlover  false)) I'll take the job, but I want terms that mean my relationship with Anne is a real relationship.
                "I want more from you than payment," you say.
				
                Anne laughs. "You've already earned your spot in my bed. What more do you want from me, ${firstname}?"
				
                But to you, this is no laughing matter. "I want more than sex," you say. "We could be good together. A real team, the likes of which no one in the Lucayan has ever seen."
				
                "You're looking for a partnership," she says tentatively, testing out whether you mean sex and business or something more.
				
                You're not going to let her off the hook that easily. "I want you to be my lover, Anne. Not just a business partner. Not just a playmate."
				
                You hold your breath, waiting for her response.
				
                 anneread > 70
                   anneequal true
                   lover "Anne Read"
                   annelover true
                  She nods, slowly. "Commitment doesn't come naturally to me," she says. "But you and I, we're different, aren't we? Sails in the same wind. We could be good together." She doesn't seem to realize she's repeating your own phrase. She looks at you, calculating at first, but then her expression softens. "You're right. We should be more than we are. But that's true regardless of this job."
				  
                  Her hand reaches out for yours tentatively, as if tenderness is foreign to her. It probably is. "You still need resources for your fleet to equal mine, and I pay for work well done, whether it's by friends or partners or…my lover." She works the phrase over in her mouth like she's tasting it, and she seems satisfied.
				  
                   jobprep
                
                   nochange
                   shutdown true
                  She shakes her head. "I'm not a creature to be tied down," she says. "Not even by you. You can take the job or not as you like, but I've no interest in being more than what we are."
				  
                  Well. That settles that then.
                   thejob
               ((annesex) and (trio)) I'll take the job, but I want Anne to commit to a real relationship with me and Caesar.
                "I want more from you than payment," you say.
				
                Anne laughs. "You've already earned your spot in my bed. What more do you want from me, ${firstname}?"
				
                But to you, this is no laughing matter. "I want more than sex," you say. "We could be good together. You, me, and Caesar. A real team, the likes of which no one in the Lucayan has ever seen."
				
                "You're looking for a partnership," she says tentatively, testing out whether you mean sex and business or something more.
				
                You're not going to let her off the hook that easily. "I want you to be my lover, Anne. Not just a business partner. Not just a playmate. I want you, Caesar, and I to have something more than just a dalliance."
				
                You hold your breath, waiting for her response.
				
                 anneread > 70
                   anneequal true
                   lover "Anne and Caesar"
                   annelover true
                  She nods, slowly. "Commitment doesn't come naturally to me," she says. "But the three of us, we have potential, don't we? Sails in the same wind. We could be good together." She doesn't seem to realize she's repeating your own phrase. She looks at you, calculating at first, but then her expression softens. "You're right. We should be more than we are. But that's true regardless of this job."
				  
                  Her hand reaches out for yours tentatively, as if tenderness is foreign to her. It probably is. "You and Caesar still need resources for your fleet to equal mine, and I pay for work well done, whether it's by friends or partners or…my lovers." She works the phrase over in her mouth like she's tasting it, and she seems satisfied.
				  
                   jobprep
                
                   nochange
              *allow_reuse I want the job, but I'm more interested in a favor from Anne as payment.
                What kind of favor?
                
                   (((sexpref  "women") or (sexpref="both")) and (shutdown  false)) I want a place in her bed.
                     ((lover  "none") and (lover  "A partner in every port"))
                       (lover  "Caesar, Tinima")
                        What about Caesar and Tinima?
                         loverchoices
                      if (lover  "Caesar, Joaquin")
                        What about Caesar and Joaquin?
                         loverchoices
                      if ((annesex) or (lover  "Caesar, and others"))
                         sexualfavors
                      
                        What about ${lover}?
                         loverchoices
                        
                          Who says they have to know?
                            Somehow, these things have a way of getting around. But you're confident you can be discreet.
                             sexualfavors
                          That relationship has run its course.
                            It's time to end that relationship, whether or not Anne accepts your proposition. And so you will, and be an unattached captain once again. Hopefully it won't affect your work.
                             lover "none"
                             sexualfavors
                          I can't betray them. I've reconsidered my proposition.
                             thejob
                    
                       sexualfavors
                      "I'm more interested in a personal reward," you say, your tone making it clear the type of favor you're interested in.
						
                       anneread > 50
                         annepay false
                         annepromise true
                        Anne laughs. "You're pretty enough, it's true," she says. "No mind for business, I see."
						  
                        "I earn my gold on the sea, not on land," you answer. "On land, I'm interested in other things."
						  
                        She reaches out to caress your neck, then cups your chin possessively. "I think we can come to an agreement. If—" She continues after a dramatic pause, "—your performance impresses me."
						
                         jobprep
                      
                         shutdown true
                        She quirks an eyebrow at you. "That's no way to proposition a future Pirate King," she says. "And frankly, you haven't impressed me enough yet. Take this job, take a proper payment, and who knows?" She spreads her hands and smiles disarmingly, but you see now how calculated each gesture is. "And if you're not interested, I can always find someone else…."
                         thejob
                   (blackguardenemy) 
                    I want her to take out Blackguard.
                       annepay false
                       blackguardmysteriousdeath true
                      She gives an amused half-smile. "He is a pestilence, isn't he?" she acknowledges. "I've been meaning to eliminate him anyway. Consider it done."
					  
                       jobprep
                   (annefavor  false) 
                    I'd like to specify that in the future, as well.
                       annepay false
                       annefavor true
                      She taps her lip, and you can see the calculations going on behind her normally arrogant expression. "All right," she says slowly. "A favor." Then she grins, and any sense of the calculating captain you just saw vanishes. "I don't like to be in debt, so try to call it in soon."
					  
                       jobprep
                   (debt > 1) 
                    I want her to clear my debt with San Alfonso.
                       annepay false
                       debtclear true
                      "That can be arranged," Anne agrees. "I have a few favors I can cash in to make sure Carolina de la Playa no longer gives you any trouble."
  					
                      You raise your eyebrows. "You don't mean for her to meet an unfortunate end, do you?"
  					
                      Anne laughs in surprise. "Of course not. Though she'll eventually need to back me as Pirate King if she wants to remain fortunate."
					  
                       jobprep
                   (anneally) 
                    I want independence from her fleet.
                      Your work has more than repaid the initial loan she made to you. It's time that you were a fully independent captain.
  					
                      She, however, seems surprised by the request. "Why would you want to leave the fleet of the future Pirate King?"
                      
                        I'd rather have no one as my master.
                           freecontract
                        When Anne is Pirate King, I want to be her equal.
                           anneread > 70
                             anneequal true
                             anneally false
                            She looks you over, considering.
                             fame < 50
                              "You haven't got the reputation for it," she says, "but you have the potential. One day you might even surpass me."
                               grin
                              At that, she grins almost too broadly for her face. "But I doubt it. Still, you've made me a fair amount of money, more than you owed me, and if you'd rather not have the protection of my fleet, then I'll hardly stop you from going your own way. But you'll need money and supplies if you strike it out on your own, so consider this your last job for me, and keep the payment I offer."
							  
                               jobprep
                            
                              "I'll admit, you have the reputation for it," she says. "If I'm not careful, you could even surpass me."
                               grin
                          
                            She laughs, as though you've told a great joke. When you don't join her laughter, she stares at you for a moment. "You will never match me," she vows. "You want out of my fleet?"
  						  
                            She mimics ripping up a contract.
                             jobprep
                        I have my reasons.
                           hiddenmotive true
                           freecontract
                           annepay false
                          "Fine," she says, not hiding her irritation. "You'll be out of my fleet. But I expect you'll regret it in the end."
						  
                           jobprep

                  
 thequest

The morning dawns with the smell of salt and potential. It's too early to gather gossip at the Lobo Negro, but you've got a map and notes and your own intuition. How do you start your quest?
 agoodstart

  I read Anne's notes.
     prep 1
    There's little in the book that you haven't heard before: rumor, conjecture, gossip, and superstition. If the Pirate King is a spirit, or an immortal, or a man who sold his soul to gain immortality, then the odds of your successfully uncovering his (or her) identity is slim anyway. You decide to proceed as though the Pirate King is a mortal, as long as you're working on this quest.
	
    Anne has helpfully listed some of the most likely pirates. It has to be someone powerful who is no longer working under their own name. Gabriela the Black disappeared from public life several years back, though she's been seen in port from time to time. A decade ago, she was hailed as the Crown's worst enemy, and since the Crown has never gloried in her capture, it's safe to assume she hasn't been caught. 
	
    Flash Jericho, known for wearing an eye-sore bright yellow coat and hat, was reportedly hanged fifteen years ago, but two years later, a man wearing royal blue with yellow trim got drunk in a tavern in Puerta Ballena and admitted that he was Flash Jericho and hadn't been killed at all. 
	
    Coamo Suerte, the son of a cacique—one of the traditional leaders of the islanders—who led a rebellion against the Crown before taking up a life aboard ship, probably retired to live with his family outside of the Crown's reach in the islands. He'd be in his sixties now if he were still operating under the guise of the Pirate King. 
	
    Ines of the Coast pled her belly to escape hanging twenty years back, as a young and already notorious pirate; it wouldn't surprise anyone to find out she'd returned to the sea under a different name after having her child. 
	
    And then there's El Sabio, a man who, even in San Alfonso, hides his name. He spends enough time on his plantation that he could be covering up his activities at sea. And he's certainly wealthy. Everyone knows he was a successful pirate in his youth; retiring to govern San Alfonso could be a ruse to cover his continued work as the Pirate King.
	
    But no matter who it is, you won't find out by sitting and going over notes.
     prep >1
      You've spent enough time preparing. Time to head out.
       welcometothejungle
    
      What do you do next?
       agoodstart
  I scour the map.
     prep 1
     sail 5
    You study the coast, trying to gauge the most likely place for an inlet to exist.
     sail > 65
       goodidea true
      Given your study of charts and your knowledge of geography, you think you can estimate the most likely spot. There's some rocky coastline to the north, and the waters off the island are riddled with hidden hazards. Most of the pirates you know avoid that bit of sea; the winds are never as fresh there, and it's more efficient to sail out of port a different way.
	  
      But you like the challenge of navigating hazardous terrain, so you've sailed it a few times.
       (sloop)
        It works best on Captain ${sloopcaptain}'s sloop; the smaller vessel is more maneuverable, so you've been able to get in closer to the coast without running aground. But even from out farther, you've admired the view.
       endif
      The island rises near into a cliff face, with crags and rocky outcroppings and hints of caves, just the kind of place that the romances always describe as where pirates hide their treasure. You've never seen an inlet there, but it's a likelier area than any other part of the island.
	  
      And your careful study of the map gives you an idea of the easiest way to cross the jungle to get there.
       prep >1
        But you've spent enough time preparing. Time to head out.
         welcometothejungle
      
        What do you do next?
         agoodstart
    
      But, frankly, charts have never been your thing. And if Anne couldn't figure it out, with her reputation for being one of the savviest sailors in the Lucayan, it doesn't surprise you that the map gives you no greater clues.
	  
      You'll just have to strike it out in the direction she marked and hope for the best.
       prep >1
        As it is, you've spent enough time preparing. Time to head out.
         welcometothejungle
      
        What do you do next?
         agoodstart
   (larksaved) I go to visit Evan Lark and see what I can find out.
     prep 1
     larkfriend
      You've become friends with Evan, after all, and while he's always demurred on this topic in the past, you might be able to pick up something new.

       office
    
      You rescued Evan Lark, and while El Sabio compensated you for saving his secretary, Lark may still feel he owes you something.

       office
      El Sabio keeps offices in town, though he himself rarely uses them, preferring to stay on his plantation while people like Carolina de la Playa represent him to the public. You suspect, however, that Evan Lark might get more paperwork done—and overhear more gossip—at the office. Lark, you've found out in your weeks in port, manages a staff, also paid by El Sabio, that work as scriveners for the illiterate sailors who come through San Alfonso. The hanging sign above the office's door bears the image of a quill and ink. A bell chimes as you enter, and a few studious-looking workers look up from their desks at your appearance. One rises to greet you, wiping her ink-stained hands on her apron.
	
      "I'm here to see Evan Lark," you say.
	
      "Of course," she says politely. "Do you have an appointment?"
	
      You shake your head and she tuts. "I'll see if he's available. I believe he was meeting with the barristers this morning."
	
      She walks to the back of the office and through a closed door. One of the other scriveners shakes his head at you before looking down at his work. 

       savejim
        But another worker, a very young man, approaches you. "Can I take a letter for you?" he asks, and you recognize his voice. It's Jim, the boy you rescued from Blackguard's ship before you became a captain.
	  
        "What a surprise to see you here!" you say. "Making an honest landbound living, I see?"
	  
        He shrugs, but you can tell he's proud. "It suits me," he says. Then he lowers his voice, looking as nonchalant as only a person trying to hide something can appear. "If you're looking for Mr. Lark, you won't catch him this week. He's out at sea, accompanying El Sabio while he's away."
	  
        "Away at sea?" you repeat.
	  
        "Surveying the island, I expect. Some sort of business to either keep San Alfonso safe or make us more money." Jim winks. "But you didn't hear it from me!" He grins at you and returns to his desk.
       endif
	  
      After a few moments, the scrivener returns. "I'm afraid Mr. Lark is unavailable," she says. "Can I put you on his calendar?"
	
      You decline—no sense inviting trouble by putting your name in official paperwork here—and head back out of the office.
       prep >1
        And you feel like you've spent enough time preparing. Time to head out.
         welcometothejungle
      
        What do you do next?
         agoodstart
  I head out into the jungle to look for the secret inlet.
     welcometothejungle
     goodidea
      Armed with a solid plan for making the best path toward the inlet's most likely location, you set off, taking a shortcut through the jungle to reach a place on the coast just before it starts to climb into the cliffs. You'll make better time this way, not having to navigate sections of beach and shore that are cut off by mangrove forests. By the time you emerge back on the coast, you're in a cheerful disposition; it's been a pleasant hike, but nothing more troubling than that. You'll be fresh enough for combat, should you meet any of the Pirate King's supposed forces.
       mermaid
    
      You set off along the coast, figuring that the best way to find the inlet is to tromp along the water's edge until you come upon it. But the going isn't so easy. While there are plenty of pristine, sandy beaches on the island, there are also mangrove forests and rocky shores. Navigating the mangroves is practically impossible; you half-wade through the treacherous roots, and at least once feel a fish or crab bite you through your boots. It's a pleasant enough day that being soaked from the knees down isn't a trial, but after taking one particularly inconvenient misstep that leaves you wet to the chest, your journey becomes a bit squishier.
	  
      And that's before you hit the rocks. Forget San Alfonso's stretch of white sand: you're faced with algae-covered boulders determined to grow into a cliff. As the ground starts to rise, you're out of sorts, annoyed with Anne Read and the Pirate King, and contemplating the possibility of the hidden inlet being a rumor created by sadistic pranksters.
       mermaid
	    
 mermaid

It's in this frame of mind that you first spot what looks like a creature in distress. At this distance, you think it might be a beached manatee, though it's slimmer. You squint, wondering if it's just a monk seal sunning itself, but that doesn't seem quite right, either. If it is an injured animal, it could be dangerous to approach—but if you continue hiking along the rocks, it's directly in your path.

  I don't need the extra hassle. I'll go the long way around.
    You start to head inland, not too far from the water but enough that a wild animal, injured or not, won't complicate your progress. You hear the sounds of guttural moaning coming from where you sighted the animal,
     speak
    and you realize it sounds an awful lot like a person trying to say the word "help." As you walk, you hear the words for "help" in some of the other languages spoken in the Lucayan.
    
      Poor shipwrecked sot. They're no problem of mine.
         ignore
         ruthless 15
        You ignore the sounds of the voice—if it even is that and not an illusion—and continue to make your way up the coast, avoiding any delays.
         longhike
      Maybe it's someone who discovered the inlet.
        Anyone who discovers the inlet isn't supposed to be able to live to tell about it. This voice, if it is a voice and not an illusion, sounds only half alive. If they managed to escape—even if they're now mortally wounded—they might have an idea of where you should go.
        
          Better them than me.
             ignore
          I approach to see if I can get information.
             help
          I try to help them.
             ruthless -10
             help
      If someone's in trouble, I'd better help.
         ruthless -15
         help
        You try to find a safe way to get down into the rocks where the person is stranded. The cries for help become clearer and more desperate as you approach, and you get the sense that whoever is down there is at the end of the line; if they don't get help soon, they'll fall into the waters below. You hurry, but not so much that you'll meet the same fate.
		
        You find reasonable footing and are finally able to put eyes on the person in need of help. That's when you discover that it isn't a person, per se, though it's no manatee or monk seal, either. 
		
        There are legends all over the world, spoken by sailors from every land, about people who live under the waters. There's a legend told by the islanders here of a beautiful young woman named Aycayia who, in punishment for hypnotizing men with her beauty, was exiled from land and eventually turned into a mermaid. If the point of her punishment was to rob her of her beauty through the transformation, and the creature before you is the result, the curse certainly succeeded.
		
        The creature on the rocks, tangled so tightly in fishing nets that she can hardly move, has some similarities to the tales of mermaids: her lower half resembles a dolphin's tail, and her upper half is thin, with two human-like arms and a round head ringed with seaweed-like hair. But though she has breasts, there would be no mistaking her for a human woman. Her face is entirely alien: gray-skinned, with eyes where a human's temples would be, no nose, and what looks like a blowhole on the back of her skull. The most human part of her is her mouth, and as one of her eyes catches sight of you, her cries become more frantic.
        
          Beautiful or not, mermaids are known for tricking and drowning humans. This is a trap.
            You know the old stories, and while the trick is usually some type of seduction rather than cries for help, you aren't about to become a mermaid's victim. Still, she might have information about the Pirate King's secret inlet….
            
              Nope. Not taking the bait.
                 gulls
              I help her, but cautiously.
                 bind
              I kill her so she can't trick anyone else.
                 werenotthatmiserable
          She's no human, but she needs help. I free her from the net.
             free
             greed -10
             mermaidfriend true
             elsabio 10
            You make your way through the rocky outcroppings to where she's lodged, taking care to steer clear of where her tail could thrash you off balance. 
			  
            "I'm going to cut you free," you say. Making sure one of her eyes can see you, you draw your cutlass slowly.
             cutfree
            *achieve mermaid
            She blinks, and her body goes very still. The netting is tight to her skin, so you cut carefully, snapping one section after another, giving her more room to breathe. Her tense stillness gives way to relaxation as you work. This is going to take a while.

            "So," you start. "Swim around here often?"
			  
            She makes a whistling sound from her blowhole that might be a laugh. "I may avoid it in the future," she says slowly. "There are usually no fishermen here. Safe for fish, good hunting for my people."
			
            "Tell me about your people," you say. She seems to relax more—making the net around her looser—while she's talking. She knows it, too. She begins to describe a people so foreign that language fails, and she shifts into the squeaks and whistles you mistook for an animal's. What you're able to gather is that there are many of them, and that they migrate to colder waters during the hottest months of the year. They haven't been back in the Lucayan all that long; they usually return after hurricane season has passed. These waters are traditionally safe for them—though she makes it clear, on no uncertain terms, that her people do not fear danger, and that they have many warriors. Whether that's truth or a lie to protect her people's safety, you're not sure.
			  
            "What about the people who use the inlet?" you ask casually.
			  
            You think that she might be puzzled, but her face is impossible to read. A clear eyelid blinks down over her eye. "El Rey del Mar?" she says finally. "He is no danger to our people."
			  
            That does not precisely answer your question.
             elrey
            
              "Who is he?"
                 legend
                "My people say he made a bargain with the Deep and traded his fins for legs," she answers, then makes a shallow shrug-like gesture. "I am not sure I believe this. He acts too much like a legged thing to have once had fins."
				  
                You cut another few sections of net, thinking. "I can show you where he docks," she says into the silence. "There are no ships there now. But I can show you."
				
                 favor
                  "This wouldn't count as my favor?" you ask suspiciously.
				  
                  "No," she says. "I make the offer freely."
                 endif
                 showyou
                
                  No. I don't trust her not to drown me.
                    She is still a mermaid, after all. Not that you'll tell her your concerns.
			  
                     point					  
                     directions true
                    "Just pointing me the right way would be fine," you say.
					  
                    Once she is free from the net, she points in the direction you'll be traveling, giving you a list of landmarks to keep your eyes out for. They're all things she can see from the water, so you'll have to stick close to the coast. She also warns you about a few of the traps she's seen others fall into, most of them natural hazards other spies have carelessly stumbled into, but a few put in place by El Rey del Mar. With her directions and warnings, you're confident you'll make it there safely.

                     mermaidfriend					
                      Once she's certain you've memorized her instructions, she turns and pushes off the outcropping where she was stuck, diving from the cliffs into the sea. A moment later she surfaces, raising an arm in a wave and whistling from her blowhole in farewell.
                       longhike
                    
                      As soon as she's given you the instructions, she turns and pushes off the outcropping where she was stuck, diving from the cliffs into the sea. You watch the surface for a moment, but you see no further sign of her.
                       longhike
                  I'd rather go on land.
                    While traveling with a mermaid might be an adventure, you're not really dressed for a swim. And, frankly, you don't know how well she can accommodate a human swimmer.
                     point
                  Great! That'll save me some time.
                    "That would be much appreciated," you say. "I'll do my best to keep up."
				  
                    She gestures to the net still around her tail. "I will not be at my fastest today," she says, and you think it's meant to be a comfort.
					
                    Once you've finished cutting her free, she turns and pushes off the outcropping where she was stuck, diving from the cliffs into the sea. A moment later she surfaces, then waits for you to find your way down. It's treacherous terrain,
                     ((sail > 65) or (pistols > 65))
                      but easy enough for someone who's used to climbing rigging and fighting on a moving deck. You make it to the waterline with no trouble at all.

                       challenging
                    
                      and you have one or two near-spills that leave your heart racing before you reach the waterline.
                     endif
					
                     challenging
                    The swim is challenging. You manage to secure your boots, jacket, and weapons into something like a sling, but it's awkward and hampers your swimming. Despite her injuries, the mermaid is far faster than you are, even if you were unburdened; she circles back several times to make sure you are keeping up. Eventually she has you grab around her neck, and you're propelled through the water by the up-and-down movements of her powerful tail.
                    
                     mermaidfriend
                      You can easily see how a sailor who annoyed a mermaid would be unable to swim back to the surface if she got it in her mind to take him below. She does take you underwater several times, but never for so long that you're worried you'll run out of air.
					  
                       stretches					
                      It's after one of the longest of these stretches that she surfaces in a rocky cove that shows signs of ships having been there. You see a dock, a crib for ship repairs, and several moorings along the shore. The jungle around it is dense, but there are a few shacks nestled among the trees, and you imagine someone could hide here quite comfortably for some time.
					
                      "Where shall I leave you?" she asks.
                      
                        The dock.
                          The mermaid swims you over into the shadow of the dock, waiting until you've grabbed onto the piling before she ducks under the surface again. A moment later, you see her off toward the inlet entrance, waving farewell before she vanishes beneath the water once more.
                           dock
                        The shore near one of the shacks.
                          The mermaid swims you over toward the shore, stopping when the water becomes too shallow for comfortable swimming. Your feet touch the sand below, which is smoother than you'd anticipated considering the rocky surroundings. She watches you gain your footing and stays above the water until you reach the shore. She gives you a wave, then vanishes beneath the water.
                           shacks
                        The jungle, a little way distant from the buildings.
                          The mermaid swims you over toward the shore, stopping when the water becomes too shallow for comfortable swimming. Your feet touch the sand below, which is smoother than you'd anticipated considering the rocky surroundings. She watches you gain your footing and stays above the water until you reach the shore. She gives you a wave, then vanishes beneath the water.
						  
                           jungle
                    
                      You can understand completely the reputation mermaids have for drowning sailors. She swims most comfortably below the surface, and if you weren't as competent a swimmer or as capable of holding your breath, you might have drowned by now.
					  
                       stretches
              "Where is the inlet from here?"
                Still tangled in the net, her head bobs off in the direction you were headed. "Once I am free, I can show you," she offers. "There are no ships there now, so if you wish to meet El Rey del Mar, you are out of luck."		
                 showyou
              "What does he look like?"
                Her shoulders move in a jerk that nearly skips your knife out of the net and onto her tail. She stills immediately, realizing the narrow miss. "He looks like you in form," she says. "Two legs, two arms, covered with cloth. His skin is the color of land in shadow, and though he shows age, he is older still than he looks. My people say that is part of his magic."
  				  
                So pirates aren't alone in storytelling. "Are there more legends about him?"
				
                 legend
              "We call him the Pirate King."
                She shows her peg-like teeth in what might be a grin. "You must have legends about him, too."

                "Too?"

                 legend
          I'll free her, but I want something in return.
             bind
            You make your way through the rocky outcroppings to where she's lodged, taking care to steer clear of where her tail could thrash you off balance. 
			  
            "I'm going to cut you free," you say. Making sure one of her eyes can see you, you draw your cutlass slowly. "But I need your guarantee that you won't harm me."

            A sigh squeaks out of her blowhole. "How would I harm you?" she asks helplessly. "I am at your mercy."
			
            "Still, I need a guarantee. An exchange. A contract. I understand your people are bound to respect that sort of thing."
			
            She stares at you for so long with the single eye that can see you, you wonder if she understood. "What is it you want from me?"
             rewards
            
              "Just information and the guarantee of my safety."
                 mermaidfriend true
                "Agreed," she says instantly, and you wonder if you should have bargained harder. You kneel next to her, ready to start work on the net.
                 cutfree
              "A single favor in the future."
                 mermaidbound true
                 favor true
                Her strange, peg-like teeth are hidden behind a tightened mouth; she might be pursing her lips, if her face were shaped differently.
                 harshterms
              "Sunken treasure."
                 mermaidenemy true
                 greed 20
                 wealth 300
                "Agreed," she says, but there is a bitter tone in her voice. "You will get what you deserve."
				
                The mermaid is eerily still as you cut the net away from her, and she greets any attempt at conversation with silence and disdain. Finally, she is free, and she dives from the rocks where she was stuck and into the water. You wait, sipping water from your canteen against the humidity, and after a while she returns, burdened with an old chest. After she thumps it on the rocks, she vanishes again, leaving you to open it. You are not disappointed. Within are gold coins and pearls you estimate to be worth about three hundred doubloons. Not bad for a day's work, though you'll have to hide it and come back for it after you finish your task for Anne.
                 longhike
              "Your service as an informant. I'll decide when your debt is repaid."
                Her strange outer eyelids narrow, and though you can't read her expression, you can tell she isn't happy.
                 harshterms
				
                "I do not like these terms," she says. "But I do not have much choice. I agree."
				
                You kneel next to her and she stills. The netting is tight to her skin, so you cut very carefully, snapping one section after another, giving her more room to breathe. Her tense stillness gives way to relaxation as you work. This is going to take a while.
				
                "Tell me about the inlet near here," you say.
				
                 favor
                  "Is this your favor?" she asks hopefully.
				  
                  "No," you answer. "Just making conversation."
				  
                  She's silent long enough that you're not sure she'll talk to you after all. But finally, just as you've snapped some of the net loose around her shoulders, she says,
                 endif
                "You want to know about El Rey del Mar? His ships use the inlet. It is not far."
                 elrey
          I put her out of her misery.
             ruthless 10
             werenotthatmiserable
            You draw your cutlass as you get closer, and the hope you might have imagined in the mermaid's strange eyes turns to something that looks like fear. She panics, thrashing against the net, tangling herself more thoroughly.
			
            "Please," she says, her voice distorted but understandable. "I am of value to my people. You can help me. You will be rewarded."
            
              I have pity and cut her free after all.
                 ruthless -10
                "Don't be afraid," you say gently, as though you intended to free her all along. "I didn't mean to frighten you. There's no need for a reward. I'll cut you loose."
				
                She watches you warily as you approach, saying nothing. "Let's start over," you offer. "I'm ${name}."
				
                You couldn't mimic the sounds required to make what you assume is her name, and by the spread of her mouth into something that resembles a smile, she knows it.
				
                "Nice to meet you," you say, and the fear finally leaves her eyes. You kneel down next to her, and she looks at you rather than your cutlass, which you take as a measure of trust.
                 mermaidfriend true

                 cutfree
              Mermaids can't be trusted. I end her.
                 ruthless 20
                There's no great battle here: she's tied in the netting and can't move, and though she thrashes, she's unable to knock you off balance. Your cutlass does its bloody work, and you leave her twitching body on the rocks where the gulls can feast on it before heading back on your way.
                 longhike
              Mermaids can't be trusted. I leave her to her fate.
                 gulls
              I'll take the bait and go for a reward.
                "I'm not unreasonable," you say, sheathing your cutlass and getting closer to her. "What kind of reward are you offering?"	

                "What would you want from me?" she counters.
                 rewards		
           (flagship  "the [i]Sea Queen[/i]") I wish I could ask Granny O'Malley for advice.
            Although the cambiantes at la Universidad might claim differently, no one has been able to pin down the rules for ghosts. It is just as you wish for Granny O'Malley that she appears at your side, hovering above one of the more treacherous outcroppings. She doesn't bother with a greeting, but points her ethereal pipe's mouthpiece at the mermaid.
			
            "She's wound up tighter than line 'round a belaying pin," the ghost says. "Still worried she'll drag you into the blue?"
			
            "What do you know about mermaids?" you ask, avoiding her question.
			
            "None of the merfolk that I've met meant harm to anyone who didn't deserve it, in their opinion," she says. "Their minds work in strange ways, but they recognize both generosity and contractual obligations. They find human greed abhorrent. You're likely to get the best advantage out of a contract, but then again, she or her people might turn on you for taking advantage of a situation like this. There's really no telling. Wounded as she is, she might not make it back to her people anyway."
            
              I take my chances with freeing her.
                 free
              I try to bind her in a contract.
                 bind
              I end her suffering.
                 werenotthatmiserable
              I leave. This isn't my problem.
                 gulls
                 mermaidenemy true
                The mermaid screeches after you, sounding more like a dolphin than a human, as you climb back up the rocks to easier ground. Her cries eventually blend in with the shrieks of the gulls, and you continue along your way to where you expect the hidden inlet to be.
                 longhike
  If it is injured or beached, I'd like to help it if I can.
     ruthless -15
     justkeepswimming
  I'm not diverting from my route, danger or not.
     justkeepswimming
    You make your way up the coast, approaching where you think you saw the wild animal. After a little while, you lose sight of it, and you think perhaps, based on how the rock formations complicate your route, you won't cross its path after all. But from where you saw it, you can hear the sounds of guttural moaning,
     speak
	
 longhike

The rest of the hike goes by in a blur of leaves and sweat and humidity.
 ((directions) or (goodidea))
  But your directions are good, and you don't encounter anything unexpected. There are a few traps in the jungle as you near the location of the inlet,
   directions
    just as the mermaid said there would be,
   endif
  but you avoid them without injury.
  
   seecamp
  You finally reach a spot in the jungle where you can see down below, though the cover is still enough to keep you hidden. There is the inlet, complete with a dock, a crib for ship repairs, and several moorings along the shore. The jungle around it is as dense as any section you've traveled, but there are a few shacks nestled among the trees, and you imagine someone could hide here quite comfortably for some time. You stay still, watching, but you see no sign of activity in the area beyond a few vervet monkeys swinging in the trees.
  
   investigate
  Where do you investigate?
  
     (dockvisit  false) The dock.
      Since no one is here, you don't see any reason to hide yourself. The dock might not have much information, but you might be able to tell how recently the line was used, and you'll definitely get a better view of the encampment.
	 
       dock
       dockvisit true
       search 1
      The dock is well built and in better care than the general docks at San Alfonso, which you suspect is because it gets less use. It looks to have been recently scrubbed, as well: there are few barnacles growing on the pilings, which means that someone tended the wood and pulled them off in the last few weeks. The line doesn't have that creaky feeling it gets after being left to the weather for a long period. If you had to guess, you'd say that a ship was here in the last two weeks.
	 
      From here, it looks as though there are eight moorings, some at a close enough length to the shore that you think they'd be good only for the shallower draft of a smaller ship: a cutter rather than a galleon, for example. That's not a huge fleet, but you suspect they're not all here at once, and as long as no one knew the ships were in the employ of the Pirate King, they could do their business at San Alfonso like everyone else.
	  
      It makes you wonder if the Pirate King's reach is smaller than everyone says, if he really has such a small fleet, or if more people know the true identity of the Pirate King than they are letting on. Or if the Pirate King hires out ships without letting them know their true employer.
	  
      And that creates more questions than it answers.
       search < 4
         investigate
      
         unfortunately
        Unfortunately, it's getting late. When the sun sets on San Alfonso, it sets quickly, and you'll never be able to find your way back to town in the dark. You've gotten some information, and it will have to be enough.
         whototell
     (shackvisit  false) The shacks.
      If there is any documentation, it's sure to be inside a building rather than on the open water or wedged into the dock. You hike out of the jungle and to the shore, headed for the shack closest to the water.
	  
       shacks
       shackvisit true
       search 1
      The four buildings are located near the dock, and there's very little to them. You enter the closest one, which looks like a full kitchen and dining area, meant, you suppose, to give docked sailors a relief from the galley. There are few food supplies within, though there is plenty of storage room. Considering the lack of evidence of mice or other pests in what little food remains, you would guess the supplies were removed within the last two weeks, possibly taken aboard ship or used by docked sailors.
	  
      Two of the other shacks have cots, their interiors a good bit larger than a berth aboard ship, though not so large as the rooms at the Lobo Negro. Like the kitchen, they appear to have been recently cleaned out. In one, there's a sea chest at the end of one cot, but it's empty and has a broken hinge. You check for secret pockets with hidden notes, but decide that it really is just a broken chest, probably replaced by the sailor it belonged to and not yet disposed of.
	  
      The last shack is an office, and though there's no wealth of paperwork, there is a sea chest, a desk, and a few documents left out under a paperweight. The top note is a letter. It reads:
	  
       larksaved
        "Evan—
		
         lettertext
      
        "Bonito—
		
         lettertext
        Below are the latest ledgers for our activities. I hope you will find everything in order. Our numbers are not as good as I would like, but I am always glad to pay my portion to San Alfonso's coffers. Let me know if what I've left is insufficient."
		
        It is, unsurprisingly, unsigned. The numbers on the papers below are impressive, though not as large as you might have guessed. The crew numbers are rather low, but there are only a few captains listed: Jericho, Coast, Suerte. Is one of them the Pirate King? Or are they employees? One of the ships, [i]Hacienda[/i], took considerable damage in a battle near the Somers Islands a few weeks before you faced the ghost ship, and the repair costs cut into the profits. The last date given is two weeks ago.
		
        You look around for the payment mentioned in the letter and see a chest bearing the crest of the Crown. Despite the inlet's security measures and the unknown nature of the encampment, the chest is locked.
         opensesame
        
          I pick the lock.
             skullduggery > 50
              It's not a complicated lock—and you've done this sort of thing before. A few twists, and pop! The latch releases.
               inside
            
               search 1
              It doesn't look like a complicated lock, but it is a Crown chest, so someone put an effort into making sure it wouldn't open. Regardless, it's beyond your skill.
               opensesame
          I bash it open.
             pistols > 50
              Brute force is all that's required here. The Crown makes sturdy chests, but they're not unbreakable. There are tools in the office, and you use a shovel to pry open the lid.
               inside
               opened true
			
              Inside is a glittering stack of gold bars worth hundreds of doubloons. No wonder San Alfonso is so prosperous—and why the Crown would very much like to collect taxes on the money that passes through the port.
              
                I leave the gold.
                   werenotthieves
                   greed -20
                  You came for information, not to steal from the Pirate King. And you've gotten that. Time to continue your investigation elsewhere.
                   search < 4
                     investigate
                  
                     unfortunately
                I take the top layer of gold.
                   greed 10
                   toplayer
                   elsabio -10
                   wealth 100
                  Surely neither the Pirate King nor El Sabio's accountants will miss one little layer of gold. You gather the top layer, making sure the layer of bars below is perfectly even and looks undisturbed.
				
                  Your bag now a bit heavier, you're ready to continue your investigation elsewhere.
                   search < 4
                     investigate
                  
                     unfortunately
                I take the whole chest.
                   chestthief
                   elsabio -10
                   greed 25
                  It's going to be difficult to maneuver back through the jungle, and there might be questions when you get back to San Alfonso.
				
                  Then again, it's San Alfonso. It's possible no one will ask at all.
                   drag
                  
                    I rig a travois to drag it back.
                       skullduggery > 65
                        It's easy enough to pull together some loose boards and line from over at the shipwright's crib, lash them together, and set up a sled of sorts. It will still be difficult work to get it back to San Alfonso, but substantially easier than just muscling it around.
                         treasurewin
                         wealth 500
                         piratekingthief true
                        *achieve piratekingthief
                        You leave it where you can grab it easily on your way back to San Alfonso to take another look around the inlet.
                         search < 4
                           investigate
                        
                           unfortunately
                      
                         search 1
                        It's a good idea, and there are plenty of loose pieces about the encampment, but you don't find anything quite the right size, and you don't have the proper tools on you to build something sturdy. Your first attempt falls apart under the weight of the chest, and the second sinks into the damp undergrowth around the shacks before you get it any distance. You'll have to come up with another plan.
                         search < 4
                           drag
                        
                           unfortunately
                    I carry it. I'm strong enough.
                       pistols > 65
                        You can manage with sheer brute strength. You've carried heavier things for hours on end while loading cargo into ships. Even though you're a captain now and you hire other people to do menial hauling tasks, your muscles can handle it. You heave the chest up onto your shoulder to test the weight and then set it down, satisfied.
                         treasurewin
                      
                         search 1
                        It doesn't look that heavy, but as soon as you try to heave it up onto your shoulder, you realize it's going to be impossible to carry. You've spent too long in the soft life of a captain, no longer hauling cargo into ship holds, to manage lifting it, let alone carrying it. You'll have to come up with another plan.
                         search < 4
                           drag
                        
                           unfortunately
                     (opened) I just take the top layer of gold after all.
                       toplayer
                    I leave it alone.
                       werenotthieves
            
               search 1
              It doesn't look too sturdy from the outside, but it is a Crown chest, and it refuses to open, even when you throw your full weight into it.
               opensesame
          I don't care what's in it; I'm taking the whole thing.
            You can always have Caesar open it when you get back to the ship, or have Tinima warp the wood. You have a crew to handle this sort of thing for you.
             chestthief
          I'm not here for a chest.
             werenotthieves
     (junglevisit  false) The jungle.
       jungle
       search 1
      There is plenty of jungle around the encampment. You're sure there are traps to keep people from getting too close. You might be able to find out something about the Pirate King's defenses just by wandering around.
	  
       skullduggery > 60	  
        You're not disappointed. You find some booby traps, most designed to capture rather than kill, and you wonder if perhaps the would-be spies who never return to San Alfonso are conscripted into service. Just beyond the crib, tucked into the undergrowth, are row after row of cannons of various ages. Some even bear Crown crests in the metal. While there have been fewer reports reaching San Alfonso of the trouble the Pirate King is making for the Crown, you have solid evidence that he is still sinking their ships and taking their weaponry.
	  
         junglevisit true
         search < 4
           investigate
        
           unfortunately
      
         search 1
        You're not disappointed. You are, however, hanging upside-down in a tree. So now you have some data about the Pirate King's booby traps firsthand.
		
        You go through a number of attempts to free yourself from the rope, but it's at such an odd angle. If you could fold yourself exactly in half, you're sure you'd be able to saw through the rope—and by Davy Jones, where did the Pirate King find line this thick and sturdy?—but you're no rope spider like you were when you spent your days in Blackguard's crow's nest. There are an inordinate amount of sit-ups involved, if it can be called sitting when you're hanging upside-down, and you've lost count of the number of times your cutlass has made contact with the rope.
		
        Gauging by the sun's position through the thick foliage, it's about two hours later before you finally manage to slice the rope. You drop out of the tree and onto your head. And whether it's the fall or some supernatural gift of the cursed inhabitants of this jungle, as soon as you're on the ground, the bizarre knot around your ankle—one you've never seen before, blast it—falls open as though it had never been there at all.
		
        You may kick the rope. Just a little. No one ever needs to hear about this.
         "Two Hours Later…"
         junglevisit true
         search < 4
           investigate
        
           unfortunately
    I've seen enough.
      You've gotten more information about the inlet than, supposedly, anyone has before, and as long as you make it back to San Alfonso alive, your mission has been a success. Given the ease of your return journey, you begin to wonder if others have found the inlet and decided not to share. Now that decision falls to you.   
       whototell
	  
      What will you do with the information you've discovered?
      
        I keep it to myself.
           silence
           elsabio 20
          Since no one has ever found the inlet and survived to tell the tale, it's no surprise to Anne Read when you report back that you were unable to find anything. You spin her a good tale of your efforts being foiled at every approach, even adding a tale about merpeople for additional detail. She's disappointed, and you doubt she'd hire you for something like this in the future, but she keeps her end of the deal.
		
           debtclear
             debt 0
            Even though you weren't able to give her the information she wanted, she calls in her favor with Carolina de la Playa, and you receive notice a few days later that your debt has been canceled. That should free up a considerable amount of funding for you in the future.
             annesconcern
          if annepromise
             wealth 100
            That is, she keeps part of the original deal she offered you. Your efforts are worth one hundred doubloons, but not worth her more personal attentions, it seems. She hands off the money to you and dismisses you from her thoughts.
             annesconcern
          if blackguardmysteriousdeath
             blackguarddead true
            Given that she'd intended to take care of Blackguard eventually anyway, you're unsurprised to hear, not a week after your little adventure, that Anne's ship encountered Blackguard's, and the latter sunk. Blackguard is no more, and anything that could be salvaged of his legacy now belongs to Anne Read. The gossips at the Lobo Negro wonder what he did to cross her, but no one is surprised that Blackguard finally met his end. Plenty of people feared him, but no one much liked the man.
		  
            Still, it's a shame about his crew. You wonder if any of your old shipmates were still onboard when Anne's broadsides struck.
             annesconcern
          if annefavor
             wealth 100
            That is, she keeps part of the original deal she offered you. Your efforts are worth one hundred doubloons, but not worth a promised favor, it seems. She hands you off the money and dismisses you from her thoughts.
             annesconcern            
          
             wealth 100
            She rewards you one hundred doubloons—less than you expected, but more than she could have given you, since you brought her back nothing but your effort.
             annesconcern
	  	  
            As far as Anne Read is concerned, that's the last of your involvement with discovering the identity of the Pirate King. Perhaps it is. But perhaps there's more yet to learn.
            
             ((joaquinfullreport) or (doubleagent))
               joaquinend
            
               endure	
              You endure two more weeks of waiting after your investigation before your ship is ready to return to the sea. Once you're back on the water, you leave the politics and intrigue behind you.
               Chapter 7: Monster of the Deep
         (hiddenmotive) I report some of my findings to Anne.
           anneread 30
          Anne is impressed that you made it to the inlet, and delighted that you can point to it on the map—though, of course, if you're off by a bit, it's hard to translate your experience directly onto the map. She's intrigued by the defenses you encountered and the buildings, and by what few notes you deciphered in the paperwork. It's not much, and it's far less than you actually know, but even without telling her everything, you can see her sharp mind drawing conclusions on what details you do provide.
		
          You have no doubt she'll send someone else to investigate now that she has a firmer idea of the location.
		
           debtclear
             debt 0
            Even though you didn't get her as much detail as she hoped for, she's satisfied with your work. She calls in her favor with Carolina de la Playa, and you receive notice a few days later that your debt has been canceled. That should free up a considerable amount of funding for you in the future.
             annesconcern
          if annepromise
             annesex true
            For the remainder of the time that Anne is in port, you're welcome in her cabin, and your reward is not a disappointment, even if it has no long-term investment. When she sails a week after your adventure, you part in fondness, and in the expectation that you may enjoy each other's company again in the future.
             annesconcern
          if blackguardmysteriousdeath
             blackguarddead true
            Given that she'd intended to take care of Blackguard eventually anyway, you're unsurprised to hear, about a week after your little adventure, that Anne's ship encountered Blackguard's, and the latter sunk. Blackguard is no more, and anything that could be salvaged of his legacy now belongs to Anne Read. The gossips at the Lobo Negro wonder what he did to cross her, but no one is surprised that Blackguard finally met his end. Plenty of people feared him, but no one much liked the man.
		  
            Still, it's a shame about his crew. You wonder if any of your old shipmates were still onboard when Anne's broadsides struck.
             annesconcern
          if annefavor
            Even though you didn't get her as much detail as she hoped for, she's satisfied with your work, and she tells you so.
		  
            "Then, your favor?" you ask.
			
            She grins. "Did you intend to call it in now?" When you shake your head, she gives a casual shrug. "I'm as good as my word, ${surname}. You'll see."
             annesconcern
          
             wealth 250
             fame 10
            Anne's payment for the information is generous, considering how little you actually deliver. She awards you 250 doubloons and her good wishes. It's clear to everyone in the Lobo Negro that you have impressed Anne Read, and by virtue of that, everyone else is a little more impressed with you as well. That sort of boost to your reputation is almost as good a currency as the gold.
             annesconcern

        I report my findings to Anne.
           fulldisclosure
           anneread 40
           fame 10
          Anne is impressed that you made it to the inlet, and delighted that you can point to it with such accuracy on the map. You've improved her cartography with a re-creation of the size and scale of the inlet, as well as the buildings and docks there. She's interested in the defenses around the inlet, and you can see her calculating the best way to make another approach on the inlet when the time comes.
           shackvisit
            But the best bit of information is the note and ledger you found, particularly the listed names. "I knew they hadn't retired," she crows. "I'm so close to becoming the next Pirate King, I can taste it."
           endif
		
          She tucks the newly revised map into her jacket. "I'm impressed with your work, ${name}. I'll make sure everyone knows it." She winks. "Consider my good word a bonus on your payment."
		
           debtclear
             debt 0
            Anne is as good as her word. She calls in her favor with Carolina de la Playa, and you receive notice a few days later that your debt has been canceled. That should free up a considerable amount of funding for you in the future.
             annesconcern
          if annepromise
             annesex true
            For the remainder of the time that Anne is in port, you're welcome in her cabin, and your reward is not a disappointment, even if it has no long-term investment. When she sails a week after your adventure, you part in fondness, and in the expectation that you may enjoy each other's company again in the future.
             annesconcern
          if blackguardmysteriousdeath
             blackguarddead true
            Anne is as good as her word. About a week after your little adventure, you hear that Anne's ship encountered Blackguard's, and the latter sunk. Blackguard is no more, and anything that could be salvaged of his legacy now belongs to Anne Read. The gossips at the Lobo Negro wonder what he did to cross her, but no one is surprised that Blackguard finally met his end. Plenty of people feared him, but no one much liked the man.
		  
            Still, it's a shame about his crew. You wonder if any of your old shipmates were still onboard when Anne's broadsides struck.
             annesconcern
          if annefavor
            "And your favor?" you ask.
			
            She grins. "Did you intend to call it in now?" When you shake your head, she gives a casual shrug. "I'm as good as my word, ${surname}. You'll see."
             annesconcern
          
             wealth 300
            Anne's payment for the information is generous—a full three hundred doubloons. Coupled with the rise in your reputation and the sudden influx of people buying you drinks at the Lobo Negro, it's a payment that's going to last for a while.
             annesconcern
         ((patron) or (patronlie)) I report what I discovered to Joaquin.
           joaquinfullreport true
           silence
         ((patron) or (patronlie)) I report to both Anne and Joaquin.
           joaquinfullreport true
           ruthless -10
           greed -10
           privateer 10
          Anne hired you for this, but your loyalties lie with Joaquin and the Crown. You'll give Anne the information she paid you for, but then you'll make sure the Crown gets it as well.
		  
           fulldisclosure
        I give Anne the full report and sell the information to Joaquin.
           doubleagent true
           greed 15
          Why not get the most out of your investigation, after all? Information is worth money.
		
           fulldisclosure
        I tell Caesar and Tinima so we can prepare for my own bid for Pirate King.
           caesar 10
           tinima 10
          You don't need Anne Read or the Crown bothering the Pirate King. That's going to be your job one of these days. So you tell Caesar and Tinima the full story.
           (((mermaidbound) or (mermaidfriend)) or (mermaidenemy))
            Tinima is far more interested in the mermaid than any details about the Pirate King. She's never read of an encounter like yours, and you're fairly certain that if such a book existed, she would know about it.
          Whether they are both fully behind your plans to eventually become the Pirate King yourself, you can't say. But at least you'll all be ready.

           silence

  It seems to take hours of wandering, and several times you think you've lost your way.
   seecamp
  
 joaquinend
You leave a message in the hollow bench-leg in the gazebo behind la Biblioteca de Alejandro, and within a few days, you've arranged a meeting. You wonder how Joaquin effectively balances his life as a spy with the duties on ship, and how he manages to be in contact so quickly after you've left word. But rather than answer those questions, Joaquin is eager to hear the details of your mission as soon as you meet.

How much do you tell him?

  All of it. I want the Crown to end the Pirate King.
     all
     fleet 1
     wealth 200
     elsabio -20
    You give Joaquin a copy of Anne's map, with the details of the inlet and the buildings there added. Joaquin takes notes on the defenses you saw and the inferences you made about the Pirate King's activities, based on what you noticed in the encampment.
     shackvisit
      He lets out a low whistle when you describe what you found in the ledger. "My superiors will never believe you've uncovered this," he says in awe.
     endif
	
    But while there's a lot of evidence in what you've reported, there's still no proof of the Pirate King's identity. "We're so close," says Joaquin. "Once we have him, the Crown can properly colonize this island." He smiles, seeing that future in front of him. "That will be a victorious day."
     fleetincrease
	
    Joaquin leaves almost immediately, and you do not see him again for the rest of your time stuck in port. You do, however, receive a notice the next day that a new ship has been added to your fleet. She's just a cutter—a speedy scouting vessel rather than a ship for boarding actions—but she's a pretty thing, and you've enough crew signed on that you can send her out alongside your flagship. There's a little cargo in her hold, and you sell it for a tidy sum. The Crown is serious about rewarding its own.
	
     endure
  All of it. I want to earn the Crown's trust.
     all
  A few details, enough to tease out additional Crown secrets from Joaquin.
    You give Joaquin a brief description of your adventure, never giving too many details, but offering enough so that he knows just how far Anne Read has gotten in her own quest to uncover the Pirate King's identity. "It's a start," Joaquin says with the fervor of a believer. "One day, we will have the Pirate King, and the Crown can properly colonize this island."
     wealth 100
     fleet 1
     fleetincrease
   (patronlie) I lie to steer the Crown in the wrong direction.
    You give Joaquin a brief description of your adventure, but rather than leaving things out, you add in new details, pointing the Crown in the wrong direction. Given that until your report Joaquin had been fully unaware of the existence of a hidden inlet, you're sure it will take them some time to realize you've put it in the wrong place on the map of the island. You give him additional contradictory details that will confuse the Crown's investigation, and you exaggerate the number of traps and weapons the inlet had protecting it.
	
    "Curse the Pirate King," Joaquin says in frustration. "One day, we'll discover who he is, and the Crown will be able to properly colonize this island."
     fleet 1
     wealth 100
     elsabio 20
    *achieve doubleagent
     fleetincrease

*hide_reuse
*temp crewtext "none"
*temp roofclimb false
*temp grabemandgo false
*temp joaquininfo false
*temp homeportadvantage false
*temp intercept false
*temp luscabattle 0
*temp weakness false
*temp damage 1
*temp rammingspar false
*temp explosions false
*temp holdcreature false
*temp mermaidarmy false
*temp ahab false
*temp weatherwitch false
*temp foo 0
 moniker  "none"
   moniker "${surname}"
*temp executioncompany "none"
*temp dinghy false
*temp modifier 0
*temp treasuredumped false
*temp luscahim "him"
*temp comandeered false
*temp luscadead false
*temp ahababoard true
*temp bait false
*temp split false
*temp preparation 0
*temp fleettext "none"

*temp luscacaptain
 blackguarddead
   luscacaptain "Temerario"
   cashflow

   luscacaptain "Blackguard"
   cashflow
  
 cashflow
 anneally
   wealth -100
 blackguardally
   wealth 100
 caesardebt
   wealth -100
 debt > 0
   debt 50
 ((patron) or (patronlie))
   wealth 500
   fleet 2
   fame 25
  
 fame > 80
   fleet 5
   crew 25
   fleetnumbers
 fame > 70
   fleet 4
   crew 20
   fleetnumbers
 fame > 60
   fleet 3
   crew 15
   fleetnumbers
 fame > 50
   fleet 2
   crew 10
   fleetnumbers
 fame > 0
   fleet 1
   fleetnumbers

 fleetnumbers
 fleet > 7
   wealth 800
   fleettext "You have a fleet of ${fleet} ships, and your wealth has grown quickly. With so many captains under you, it's inevitable that they don't all get along. You've figured out how to pair them to your best advantage, however, and with the right captains working in teams, you've found they can bring down richer marks. You're making quite a ludicrous profit."
   morale
if fleet > 6
   wealth 700
   fleettext "You have a fleet of ${fleet} ships, and your wealth has grown quickly. With so many captains under you, it's inevitable that they don't all get along. You've figured out how to pair them to your best advantage, however, and with the right captains working in teams, you've found they can bring down richer marks. You're making quite a ludicrous profit."
   morale
if fleet > 5
   wealth 600
   fleettext "You have a fleet of ${fleet} ships, and your wealth has grown quickly. With so many captains under you, it's inevitable that they don't all get along. Luckily, you can span enough of the Lucayan that they hardly overlap, and you can not only hit the trade routes but also harry your foes when the mood strikes. The riches you're bringing in are far greater than your expenses."
   morale
if fleet > 4
   wealth 500
   fleettext "You have a fleet of ${fleet} ships, and your wealth has grown quickly. With so many captains under you, it's inevitable that they don't all get along. Luckily, you can span enough of the Lucayan that they hardly overlap, and you can not only hit the trade routes but also harry your foes when the mood strikes. The riches you're bringing in are far greater than your expenses."
   morale
if fleet > 3
   wealth 400
   fleettext "You have a fleet of ${fleet} ships, and your wealth is steadily growing. Your captains squabble on occasion, but you're building a solid fleet, and you regularly hit the dominant trade routes to both the north and south. The riches you're bringing in are far greater than your expenses."
   morale
if fleet > 2
   wealth 300
   fleettext "You have a fleet of ${fleet} ships, and your wealth has increased because of it. Your fleet is small enough that your captains rarely interact with each other, which makes it easy to give them appropriate regions without causing quarreling. You can cover a bit more area with a fleet your size, and you're certainly earning more than your expenses."
   morale
if fleet > 1
   wealth 200
   fleettext "You have a fleet of ${fleet} ships, and you can feel the extra income lining your coffers. It's not a lot, granted, with all the extra crew to support, but you're more than breaking even."
   morale

   wealth 100
   fleettext "You still have only your flagship in your fleet. It's frustrating, but you just haven't had the chance to expand."
   morale

 morale
 crew > 70
   crewtext "are some of the finest on the seas; they may look like a ragtag bunch of villains—and you suppose technically they are—but they're efficient, capable, and proud to sail under your flag."
   wealth 100
   piratesabroad
if crew > 49
   crewtext "are capable, if not finely honed. They follow orders, and you've had no attempts at mutiny in the past year—something not all captains can claim as the Crown has become more dangerous."
   wealth 50
   piratesabroad

   ruthless > 60
     crewtext "are too terrified of your retribution to complain, and they warn others off of signing onto your ships, which has a dual effect: you manage to keep them in line while gaining a greater reputation for ruthlessness among your peers."
     piratesabroad
  
     crewtext "are the best you can find, which isn't saying much. Caesar tries to keep competent sailors, carpenters, and fighters in your roster, but you're known throughout the Lucayan as a soft heart. You just don't take enough ships or bring in enough wealth to keep the best talent, and they have no fear of breaking their contracts in favor of better offers."
     piratesabroad
	
 piratesabroad
*image chap7.png center Chapter Seven: Monster of the Deep

Hurricane season passes, then the dry season, and back into the rainy season with no further news about the Pirate King.
 anneequal
  You'd expected to hear more news from Anne on her investigation, but, like everyone else, she's been busy with the usual business of piracy.
 anneally
   wealth 50
  Anne has sent you on a few missions since your hunt for the Pirate King's identity, and they've always been fairly lucrative for both of you. You may not like taking work from another captain, but you've made a small profit by it.
The Crown has been even more present than normal in the Lucayan, and their efforts to extinguish piracy have made work harder for everyone over the last year. Even for you.
 ((patron) or (patronlie))
  Officially, that is. Through side channels, they've sent additional funding and ships your way, and on various islands you've heard stories about yourself that you didn't start—evidence that someone else is trying to make you look good.

${fleettext} The crews on your ships ${crewtext}

 fameandfortune
You've amassed ${wealth} doubloons. Do you want to spend any of that?
 spendy

  I want to buy another ship.
    A few ships have come up on the auction block since you became a captain, and you've kept a weather eye on them. A few affordable ones have come up for sale. The best you've had the chance for is a galleon called the [i]Amber Dragon[/i], whose captain, Lin Arraiz, is in so much debt that she has to sell her ship to another captain's fleet. Luckily, she plans to stay on with it, meaning the buyer gets both the ship and her captain in the deal. Another potential purchase is a half-wrecked ketch called [i]Ebony[/i], which barely survived a storm. One of her masts is completely lost, but she's fixable.
    
      *selectable_if (wealth>75) I buy the [i]Ebony[/i] for 75 doubloons.
         ebony
         fleet 1
         boughtebony true
         wealth -75
        Caesar hires one of your crew—Alfonzo Oscuro, who has experience as a ship's carpenter—to sail the [i]Ebony[/i], once she's seaworthy again. Caesar, with Tinima's guidance, also hires a fresh-faced cambiante just out of la Universidad to work with Oscuro to save on the repairs. The cambiante, who goes only by Tigre, is so utterly eager to please that he tails after Oscuro like a chick after a mother hen.
		
        You think it's likely to be a profitable investment.

         boughtamber
           thedragon
        
           famous
      *selectable_if (wealth>125) I buy the [i]Amber Dragon[/i] for 125 doubloons.
         boughtamber true
         thedragon
         fleet 1
         wealth -125
        Lin Arriaz is grateful to be afloat, and even more grateful for the influx of cash to make necessary repairs to the [i]Amber Dragon[/i].
         privateer > 50
          You also find in Lin a common spirit: she's long hoped for a letter of marque and seeks to one day retire as a lawful citizen in a Crown colony. While you often prefer to target other pirates when you're looking for marks, some of your captains are not so enthusiastic about pirate hunting. Lin, however, takes to it with a gusto. You're confident you've made a good choice in purchasing her ship.
           famous
        
          You find, however, that it's hard to convince Lin to target Crown ships. She's a bit of a Crown sympathizer, and you think she one day hopes to retire as a respectable citizen in a Crown colony. But as flaws go, it's not a horrible one. You assign her to more mundane, and marginally legal, assignments, and the money keeps flowing into your pockets.
           famous
      *selectable_if (wealth>200) I buy both for 200 doubloons.
         boughtamber true
         ebony
      I'd rather spend money on something else.
         spendy
  *selectable_if (wealth>100) I indulge in my own pleasure.
     wealth -100
    There are so many entertainments offered in the Lucayan, you're determined to catch them all. You didn't find the opera in Puerta Ballena to your liking, but the races in Puerta Caballo were a tremendously fun diversion. You lost more than you made on that night, but it's the rush of excitement that matters! Live well, for tomorrow you could be hanged, after all!
     famous
  I give my crew a bonus.
     crew 30
     caesar 10
     tinima 10
     greed -15
     wealth -50
     sail 10
    Your crew appreciates a bit of a bonus here and there more than the amount of money ought to merit. You've heard you can buy a pirate's loyalty, but you suspect it's more that you can buy their happiness. Their gratitude doesn't always last once they've hit port, but on deck, their good cheer makes your flagship a more orderly place.
     famous
  I save it.
    Why?
    
      Against future crises.
         sail 10
        There are horror stories about captains losing entire fleets in a rogue hurricane, or an unexpected battle. You keep your flagship in good repair, but if an emergency hits, you want to have the cash available to fix her.
         fleet > 1
          This becomes even truer the more ships you welcome into your fleet. They may sail different seas than you and take different marks, but it's ultimately your responsibility to make sure your fleet is shipshape.
         noindulgence
        If that means you indulge a bit less in your creature comforts, so be it. You'll be able to retire more comfortably at the end of your career.
         famous
      So I can bury it.
         fame 10
        You have every intention of giving the legend of Ishmael the Lost a run for its money. Or a dig for its money. At any rate, one of these days, you'll design your own detailed map, put an X marking the spot, and lead the way to a buried treasure that will live, in the retelling, long after you're gone.
         noindulgence
      When I earn my citizenship under the Crown, I want a healthy start.
         privateer 10
        Your nest egg for that future life as a law-abiding citizen is an important part of your plans for tomorrow. You'll hardly be able to buy yourself a secure place in society unless you have a healthy sum to start with. So save you will!
         noindulgence

 famous
 ((patron) or (patronlie))
   luscastory

   fame > 75
    Your successes since you began your career have put your name in the same breath as such famous pirates as Captain de Contreras, Gabriela the Black, Anne Read…and the Pirate King. It has also brought you to the attention of the Crown, and you've found yourself making a number of narrow escapes. Sometimes you wonder if you shouldn't have handled Joaquin's offer differently, if only to avoid their constant scrutiny.
     luscastory
  if fame > 65
    Your successes since you began your career have people telling stories about your adventures that are grander than they are true, but you still don't have the popularity or the following of pirates like Anne Read does. Unfortunately, you're successful enough that the Crown has dogged your efforts, and you've dodged a few capture attempts. Sometimes you think of that offer from Joaquin and wonder how things might have been different if you'd chosen a different path.
     luscastory
  if fame > 50
    Your successes since you began your career have given you enough of a reputation that you're occasionally bought drinks in pubs throughout the Lucayan. You're respected and acknowledged, but you don't have anywhere near the pull of a pirate like Anne Read. On the upside, you're not really successful enough that the Crown troubles you. You've been able to quietly grow your wealth and your fleet without constant scrutiny from the Crown Navy.
     luscastory
  
    You've had some successes since your career began, but very few people know your name, and fewer still recognize your face. Though you've had an encounter or two with the Crown, they haven't targeted you particularly, the way they've made every effort to attack Anne Read's ships. What wealth and ships you've accumulated, you've done without anyone particularly noticing or caring.
     luscastory
	
 luscastory

On a blustery night at the beginning of hurricane season, a year after your fateful encounter with the ghost ship, you're having a quiet drink in a pub in Puerta Ballena, unloading some stolen goods right under the governor's nose. Your flagship is moored well away from the port and out of sight; Caesar is arranging for food and supplies to be loaded into the unmarked yawl the two of you sailed into port while you handle the business transaction. It's risky, but the payout on this deal will be good if you manage it without getting caught.

While you wait for your contact, you hear the usual stories of ghosts and merpeople and derring-do from tables around you. When you hear someone mention the hidden treasure of Ishmael the Lost—something you hadn't thought about since your days on Blackguard's ship—you listen more closely.

"Oh, he found it all right," says the speaker. "Near lost his ship, too."

"Why?" asks one of the listeners. "Was it cursed?"

"No, protected," the speaker explains sagely. "Captain ${luscacaptain} woke the Lusca."
 luscacaptain  "Blackguard"

  So the old devil found it after all. Doesn't sound like it went well for him.
 endif

"The Lusca?" one of the listeners gasps out.

"No such thing!" another protests.

"It's true!" the speaker says. "${luscacaptain} saw it with his own eye. Body of a giant octopus, aye, but rows of teeth like a shark's. The crew watched as the first mate got shredded in its dread maw. And now that it's awake, there'll be no stopping it."

"Nor nothing guarding the treasure," jokes one of the listeners, and the sailors at the table raise their glasses to ${luscacaptain} and his poor luck.

  I raise a glass as well.
    Who knows? It might keep the same bad luck from landing on your deck.
     ((patron) or (patronlie))
       apirateandaspywalkintoabar
    
       tyche
  I chuckle at the poor fool who woke the monster.
    Fools like ${luscacaptain} make their own bad luck. There's a reason you've had a run of good fortune lately.
     ((patron) or (patronlie))
       apirateandaspywalkintoabar
    
       tyche
  I ask the speaker about the damage the monster has done.
    The speaker looks over at you with a shrug. "A few more sightings after ${luscacaptain} woke it. I've heard at least three ships have been sunk."

    "No-good Crown-loving sailors, I hope," one of the listeners chimes in, and you can't quite tell if he's being serious.

    "We should only be so lucky," says the speaker, just ambiguously enough that no one accuses him of loyalty one way or another.
     ((patron) or (patronlie))
       apirateandaspywalkintoabar
    
       tyche
  I do nothing. I'm keeping a low profile.
    And hopefully luck will be with you.
     ((patron) or (patronlie))
       apirateandaspywalkintoabar
    
       tyche

      But then you see Joaquin de Aviles walk into the tavern, and you have a feeling your luck has already run out. If he's here—and you know he's a Crown agent—then there's no hope of making your deal without being recognized. And if you're recognized here in Puerta Ballena, and Joaquin can alert the officials without blowing his own cover, you'll be heading for the noose.
      
        I greet him. He won't risk his cover to turn me in.
           apirateandaspywalkintoabar
        I try to leave surreptitiously before I'm spotted.
          You stand casually, like you're about to head to the bar for another drink. But that movement is enough for Joaquin—that, or he was looking for you. He gives you a big smile and gestures to the table you just left. It looks as though he'd like to speak with you.
          
            I go to greet him instead.
               apirateandaspywalkintoabar
            I return to my table and wait to hear him out.
               crownoffer
            I can still outrun him.
               makeabreak
        I'm not losing this deal! I'll stay put.
           greed 20
          You've got too many doubloons riding on this deal to let yourself be roused by a Crown spy. But Joaquin takes in the room, then smiles as he sees you sitting there. Despite your efforts to remain unnoticed as you came in to Puerta Ballena, Joaquin knew to look for you here.
           crownoffer
        I make a break for it.
           makeabreak
          You dash toward the kitchens of the taberna, unsurprised to hear both hot pursuit and laughter following in your wake. Puerta Ballena isn't San Alfonso, after all, and old grudges can be resolved in the streets in this part of town without fear of anything so rare as justice becoming involved.

          Through the kitchens—where a chicken squawks at your presumption (not to mention the cook)—and out the back door, and you're free in the night. For now.
          
            Make straight for the yawl.
               getaway
              You're confident that you're quick enough to lose him without guiding him to your ship. But despite your speed, the direct route has him keeping pace with you, a few blocks behind. You need to lose him.
              
                I lose him in a crowd.
                  Though the evening is early, there are plenty of people taking to the streets of the docks district.
                   parley > 50
                    You laugh and engage some strangers in conversation, and they take you into their group for a block or two before you dart away. To be safe, you do this a few times, taking a few odd turns here and there before you're sure you've lost him.
                     evadesuccess
                  
                    But the first time you try to blend in with a group, your casual comment strikes one of the travelers the wrong way, and, given the crowd you've fallen in with, it's not a huge surprise that the immediate response is violence. What is surprising is how quickly the violence escalates into a full-scale brawl, as though every sailor on leave in Puerta Ballena is just itching for a fight.
                     terriblebrawl
                 (roofclimb) I take to the rooftops.
                   highroad
                  Puerta Ballena is one of the oldest Crown cities in the Lucayan, and the docks district has more warehouses than residences or shops. The buildings are all close enough together that once you've scaled one, you've got access to the rest of the district from above.

                   sail > 50
                    You've spent enough time in the rigging to keep your balance scaling something as stationary as a building. You leap up a wheelbarrow full of hay next to a shop, scramble for the roof, and pull yourself up and to your feet again. Then you're off, light on your feet and practically soaring above Puerta Ballena.
					
                    When you look back, there's no sign of Joaquin. If he's following you now, he's invisible, and you don't think he could manage that level of cambiar.
                     evadesuccess
                  
                    The trouble is, you've never been confident climbing up to your own crow's nest. Even though the buildings are stationary, they trigger the same uncertainty you have when swinging in the rigging. You've made your way up a wheelbarrow full of hay and have gripped the roof of a shop, but you just can't manage to haul yourself up.
					
                    "Having a bit of trouble?" a voice says from below. You turn and lose your grip, tumbling into the hay. A pair of arms hoists you to your feet, and Joaquin stands beside you, helping you steady yourself. "I'd almost think you didn't want to talk to me."
                     notalkey
                I use cambiar to fog the streets.
                  You run, chanting under your breath.
                   cambiar > 50
                    You can feel the pull of the ocean, the lapping of waves against the hulls of boats, pulling at their moorings, the slap of water against the docks. It's a simple enough thing to draw on the water's desire to continue flowing, despite the obstacles. You pull it into the air, letting it flow over the streets of Puerta Ballena in a cloud. Thicker and thicker it comes ashore, closing around you, filling the streets behind you.
					
                    Outside of one taberna, a patron comments to another about the odd weather. Someone curses the Lusca and the captain who woke it. Seems you're adding to the monster's legend.
                     evadesuccess
                  
                    You can feel the pull of the ocean, but it's hard to focus on the water as your feet slap against the dirt road. They're already damp from the frequent rains this time of year, and as you think about the road, and the water, you manage to create a puddle in front of you rather than fill the air with fog. You step straight into it and slip as it sucks at your boot.

                    Your pride is damaged more than anything else, though your shoulder and ankle are bound to be sore in the morning. And your blasted boot is still stuck in your magical mud. As you right yourself, a hand grabs you by the arm and hoists you to your feet. Joaquin stands beside you, helping you steady yourself. "I'd almost think you didn't want to talk to me."
                     notalkey
                I start a street brawl as a distraction.
                  Though the evening is early, there are plenty of people taking to the streets of the docks district. And some of them have already been drinking enough to create an easy rise to violence. You think you spot some sailors from one of the Crown's allied nations—allied, but not on polite terms, and easy enough to rile. You say something insulting about their monarch and they launch back at you. Several of the Crown's good citizens intervene. And after that, well, it's all over but the shouting. And the punching. And the mess of limbs trying to beat each other to a pulp.
                   pistols > 50
				  
                    Once the brawling starts, you're able to direct it with a blow here, a kick there, a well-placed scabbard tripping up another bystander. Soon enough, you're through. Across the crowd, you see Joaquin, standing clear. Despite the odds, he makes eye contact with you, touching the brim of his hat in acknowledgment of your escape.
                     evadesuccess
                  
                    The problem is, at this point it's hard to figure out where the brawl ends. 
                     terriblebrawl
            Duck into a shop.
               shop
              Ducking into a building could get you out of his view long enough to change direction. Even better, the place could have a back door, putting you well on your way before he realizes he's gone the wrong way. What shop do you try?
              
                A panadería. I can grab some baked goods if I get hungry.
                  The panadería near the taberna is a humble little bakery, but you've noticed that it has a convenient back door. It's on the verge of closing when you reach the door, and the young woman closing the shop looks surprised to see a ruffian like you running her way.
                  
                    I barge past her and through the shop.
                       ruthless 10
                      You push past the young woman, ignoring her cry of distress, and charge through the shop to the back door. You hear her shouting and suspect that she'll draw Joaquin's attention. But by then, you'll be long gone.					  
                       kitchen
					  
                      There are several loaves of bread next to the orno—the huge oven—probably ready for tomorrow's breakfast.
                      
                        They look delicious. I grab one.
                           greed 15
                           ruthless 10
                          You eat a bit as you rush toward the yawl and your escape. It's delicious. You'll have to remember that place the next time in Puerta Ballena.
                           evadesuccess
                        I grab one and slide a coin in its place.
                           wealth -1
                           greed -15
                           ruthless -10
                          You've almost certainly overpaid for the loaf, but as you take the first bite through its crisp crust, you have the feeling it was worth it. Nothing tastes more delicious than fresh bread and victory.
                           evadesuccess
                        I don't have time for bread!
                          You dart out the back door, running a few blocks before taking a slower gait to blend in with the crowd. You don't see any more of Joaquin, and you're convinced you've outsmarted him this time.
                           evadesuccess
                    I ask politely if I might use the back door.
                       ruthless -10
                      She senses the urgency in your voice, and possibly notices the cutlass at your side. For whatever reason, she lets you past just as she locks up. You hurry to the back of the shop and out of sight.
                       kitchen
                    I hand her a coin and ask her to point Joaquin in the wrong direction.
                       wealth -1
                       ruthless -10
                       greed -10
                       parley 10
                      The coin vanishes into her hand, and she assures you she'll take care of it—so long as you're out of her shop by the time she returns. You take that to mean you should leave through the kitchen. You move quietly rather than quickly in the darkness inside the shop, and you hear a short conversation as she calls out directions in response to a deep voice.
                       kitchen
                A cooperage. A place that makes barrels is sure to have good improvised weapons.
                  You're certain you heard about a romance recently that features a pirate doing battle in some sort of smithy. A cooperage won't have any swords or intentional weapons—you've got your own, so that hardly matters. But the number of metal tools you'll have to throw at your assailant from the shadows is comforting to you. At least you can have a heavy hammer ready at the door if he follows you in.
				  
                  But this is not a romance, and there's to be no great display of swordsmanship in the shadows of the closed cooperage today. You stand by the door, ready for Joaquin to burst through. Instead, you hear his voice asking a passing traveler if they saw someone of your description. Just as well you appeared incognito in Puerta Ballena; no one seems to have any idea where you've gone. You wait a bit, listening as he leaves the area, before you liberate yourself.
				  
                  Despite losing him, you can't very well return to the taberna. Your contact will have heard about the display by now and isn't likely to wait.
                   evadesuccess
                The ropewalk. It's long and has doors at several intervals.
                  It takes a long building to make rope, and the workers there aren't paid well enough to take notice of anyone, especially at this time of the evening. You duck in and quickly make your way up to the rafters, where you can overlook the entire interior. You rush down the loft farther into the building, so you see from a distance when Joaquin enters, giving you plenty of time to duck out of sight. The worker he approaches either didn't notice you or doesn't care, and as Joaquin climbs to the rafter on the opposite wall, you swing down and out one of the side doors, retracing your steps and taking a few-block detour before heading toward the yawl.
                   evadesuccess
            Lead a merry chase.
               fame 10
              No one can very well write a ballad about your exploits and daring escapes if you don't make a fuss. Even more, though, you don't want to lead Joaquin and whoever might be with him back to your ship. That would be even worse for business than losing this deal.
			  
              Although it's past sunset, there are still merchants out here and there, as well as dogs and half-domesticated pigs roaming the streets. One cart, selling raw sugarcane to anyone whose sweet tooth hasn't yet been quenched by rum, looks like a particularly promising obstacle.
              
                Perfect. I turn over the sugarcane cart and vanish in the chaos.
                   ruthless 15
                   skullduggery > 65
                    You run on the dirt street—this part of town can't afford cobblestones—and slide into one of the cart's legs, tumbling out of the way before the whole thing comes crashing down. The pigs, gleeful with the promise of extra sugar, surround the cart, while the owner hollers to anyone who can hear her that some scoundrel owes her for the lost product.
					
                    On its own, the cart wouldn't have been enough, but the sudden chaos and rush of the pigs causes a horse to shy and break away from its post, then dash through an alley, loosing the ropes on a stack of barrels full of ale or molasses or some other messy substance. You don't know, because you're still running, and the sounds of chaos are rapidly fading behind you.
                     evadesuccess
					
                    It's a shame your smuggled goods won't reach your contact, but you can always sell them at another port. For tonight, you're free, and you're grinning when you meet Caesar at the yawl.
					
                    "Cast off," you say, and Caesar only raises his eyebrow before obeying. He knows you well enough to be sure you'll tell him the whole story eventually.
                     luscahunt
                  
                    You run on the dirt street—this part of town can't afford cobblestones—and take a swing with your cutlass at one of the cart's legs. But it must be far better constructed than it looks. Your cutlass bites into the wood and stays there, and the cart owner, a large woman with a larger frown, glares at you.
					
                    "Just what do you think you're doing?" she demands.
                    
                      I apologize and dart away.
                         ruthless -10
                         greed -10
                        No harm, no foul, right? At least you're quick enough to get away before she decides to grab you herself. But the delay, short as it was, was enough that you can see Joaquin catching up in a nonchalant sort of way. He's definitely not attracting the attention that you are.
                         tryagain
                        
                          Head straight for the yawl.
                             getaway
                          Duck into a shop.
                             shop
                          Climb up to race over the rooftops.
                             roofclimb true
                             highroad
                      You know what distracts people? A brawl.
                        You respond to her harsh words with a few choice phrases about her parentage, which is enough to get things going. It's still early in the evening, but enough drinkers have taken to the streets that it isn't difficult to engage several more rough-and-tumble sorts in the fracas, and the street is soon a mess of arms and legs and faces.

                         pistols > 65
                          Once the brawling starts, you're able to direct it with a blow here, a kick there, a well-placed scabbard tripping up another bystander. The sugarcane-cart owner has long since forgotten you in favor of trading insults—physical and verbal—with a cart owner selling elote. Across the crowd, you see Joaquin, standing clear. Despite the odds, he makes eye contact with you, touching the brim of his hat in acknowledgment of your escape.
                           evadesuccess
                        
                          The problem is, at this point it's hard to figure out where the brawl ends. 
                           terriblebrawl
                          You're stuck somewhere in the middle, and everywhere you turn, there's a fist or an old shoe or someone's hip, and you trip and stumble through the crowd.
						  
                          Then there are arms helping you up and pulling you through the mess. "I'd almost think you didn't want to talk to me," Joaquin says, supporting your weight and deflecting attacks coming in.
                           notalkey
						  
                          "How did you guess," you say wryly.
						  
                          "Talking is all I want," he explains, but you can feel the grip he has on your arms, and you suspect he has no intention of letting you run now.
						  
                          You relax and let him guide you. "Then I suppose I should hear you out."
						  
                          A half hour later you are sitting at a table in a taberna many blocks from where you started the evening.
                           crownoffer						  
                      I ignore her and run.
                        You don't have time to make nice with a local merchant when you have a Crown spy on your tail! You glance behind you and see that Joaquin is catching up in a nonchalant sort of way. He's definitely not attracting the attention that you are.
                         tryagain
                I'm not going to ruin the cart when I can just take to the rooftops.
                   roofclimb true
                   highroad
                You know what's more distracting than a broken cart? People scrambling for coins.
                   fame 20
                   greed -20
                   wealth -50
                  If you want your reputation to spread, that's certainly one way to do it. With a flourish, you toss coins into the air. The metal glints in the torchlight, giving the night the appearance of falling stars. What do you shout to the crowd?
                  
                    "Long live the Pirate King!"
                       privateer -30
                      It doesn't really matter who the Pirate King is, so long as people rally to the title. Or brawl over it. But you leave the disagreements behind you,
                       circles
                      taking a circuitous route back to the yawl, leaving some grateful and some fighting citizens in your wake. Once or twice you think that Joaquin has followed you, but you're sure you've lost him by the time you return to the yawl.
                       evadesuccess
                    "Compliments of Captain ${moniker}!"
                       fame 10
                      They have to know who you are in order to credit you with a great escape, after all. There's enough anti-pirate sentiment in Puerta Ballena that the coins you scatter aren't met entirely with cheers, but you leave those naysayers behind you,
                       circles
                    "The Lucayan is free!"
                       privateer -30
                      It's perhaps not the most obvious anti-Crown slogan you could shout, but enough people hear the intent to either take up—or deny—your position. But you leave the disagreements behind you,
                       circles

 apirateandaspywalkintoabar

Your contact has yet to arrive when Joaquin de Aviles appears, and it must be said for the man: for a Crown spy, he blends in perfectly well with the local rough-and-tumble. He spends only a moment looking around before he sees you, then smiles as he heads your direction. You rise to meet him halfway, but he just gestures back to your table. You sit, and
 crownoffer
Joaquin slides into the chair across from you. A drink is delivered almost as soon as he's seated, though you didn't see him order.

"Captain ${moniker}," he says cheerfully. "I apologize for interrupting your business here in Puerta Ballena."

  "You are never an interruption, Joaquin."
     joaquin 20
     still
  "I'm sure I'll be able to conclude my business another time."
    He grimaces, so quickly you almost didn't see it. He's good at hiding his distaste for piracy on San Alfonso, but his Crown alliance must run deep enough that he doesn't enjoy hearing about your activities.
     still
  "Let's not make a habit of it."
    He laughs, though you were sincere. You suspect that's part of why he finds it funny.
     still    
  
 still
"Still, there are…parties who would like to compensate you for your trouble." He tosses a small bag across the table to you, and it slides open just enough for you to get a glimpse of what is inside. Something glimmers in the taberna's candlelight like diamonds.

 ((patron) or (patronlie))
   grabthemandgo
   grabemandgo true
   wealth 400
  "I am but happy to serve," you say, but you pocket the pouch anyway. "I assume this is an advance against a task, and not merely compensation for any inconveniences our meeting causes to my cargo delivery?"
  
  "I know nothing about cargo delivery," Joaquin says, establishing plausible deniability, you suppose. "I do, however, have information about the Lusca."

   hearmeout
   joaquininfo true
  "Tell me."
  
  "You've likely heard some that's true," he says. "Captain ${luscacaptain} went searching for the treasure of Ishmael the Lost in the waters off of Playa Roja."
  
  "Shipwreck Shoal?" you ask, using the unofficial name for that shallow stretch of water.
  
  Joaquin nods. "And you know there's a trench just north of the shoal?"
  
  That trench has a nickname as well: Davy Jones's Coffin. "I do."
  
  "That's where the monster resided until recently," Joaquin explains. "Nearest we can determine is that Ishmael the Lost tied a curse from his treasure to the, ah, coffin, making the Lusca its guardian."
  
  "Risky move," you say. "He'd never have been able to get it back."
  
  "It's clear he didn't," Joaquin says. "What my contacts have been able to determine is this: Captain ${luscacaptain} must have gotten some of the treasure onboard before being attacked, and the Lusca is still trying to hunt it down. It's been terrorizing ships along the route from Playa Roja…"
  
  "To San Alfonso," you guess, and Joaquin nods.
  
  "The Crown has a bounty on the beast," he offers, though that much was obvious.
  
     (joaquindebt) "Would this remove my debt to you?"
       joaquindebt false
      He frowns. "I'd almost forgotten about that. And I'd hoped you would take this for a better reason than owing me. But yes. It would."
	  
      "Then I'll do it," you agree.
	  
       thanks
     (grabemandgo  false) I take the pouch after all.
       wealth 400
      "Thank you for the information," you say, taking the payment off the table.
	  
       thanks
      "I'm sure the job is now in good hands," Joaquin says.
       joaquinlover
        He runs a finger along the back of your hand. "Are you staying the night in port?"

        That, of course, was not the plan, and Caesar won't like having to spend the night in the yawl waiting for you.
        
           (lover  "Caesar and Joaquin") Invite him back to the yawl. There's room for the three of us.
            Joaquin grins and the two of you leave together. Caesar is surprised to see Joaquin—and is still a little dubious of your lover the Crown spy—but the three of you are soon laughing and sharing the same camaraderie aboard ship that you had when you first started your relationship. You take the yawl out a ways before anchoring, giving the three of you solitude under the stars.
			
            In the morning, you sail back to port and say goodbye, not knowing when the three of you will next share each other's company.
			
            When you sail back out to ${flagship},
             luscahunt2
           (privateer < 40) Perhaps another time.
            You don't want to turn down Joaquin, but your relationship is in a strange place—you still hate the Crown, and he's a devoted loyalist. Spending the night together won't make anything clearer.
             disappointed
			
            Joaquin looks disappointed, but he nods. "Until we next see each other," he says. "Don't get eaten by monsters."
			
            You grin. "You either."
            
             luscahunt
          I have to get back to my ship.
            You can't just leave Caesar on the yawl, expecting you to come back with your client, and instead waiting all night for you. Business before pleasure.
             disappointed
          I can make time….
             joaquin 30
             caesar -20
            You don't see Joaquin often enough to give up a chance like this. Maybe someday, your encounters won't be so rare and hard to come by, but in the meantime…
			
            "If it means staying with you," you answer, and Joaquin takes your hand in his.
			
            "I have a room at the Tar and Bell," he says. "Meet me there in an hour."
			
            You don't ask what will keep him busy between now and then, and he doesn't offer. You part ways, and before you go to the inn, you do your best to track down your contact, in case you can still make your sale. Something—most likely something Joaquin is responsible for—has chased him off, though. You'll have to find a buyer in another port.
			
            But all of that fades like morning fog when you arrive at the Tar and Bell and find Joaquin waiting for you. It's a nicer inn than where you'd normally stay, and he splurged on one of the better rooms, giving you a night not only of passion but also of comfort and security.
            
              It feels a little too landlocked. I'm eager to get back to my ship.
                But being secure reminds you a bit of locked doors and stone walls—prisons are also known for their security. It's a breath of relief to leave the Tar and Bell before sunrise and head back to sea.

                 furiousfirstmate
                Caesar is, unsurprisingly, furious that you not only didn't make the sale, but also spent the night in port without sending word. Rather than holler and curse, however, your large first mate sets in for a good brood.
				
                He'll forgive you eventually.
				
                That morning,
                 luscahunt2
              A body could get used to comforts like this.
                You rise before the sun, reluctant to leave the warm bed and return to your ship. It wouldn't be so bad to have a life on land if it were always like this.
				
                 furiousfirstmate
              I'd feel better about creature comforts if I were the one supplying them.
                You could get used to a life on land if it meant this kind of comfort, but you'd rather be the one responsible for the choices. It isn't that you don't like being pampered every so often, but you'd rather be the one with your hand on the steering wheel, so to speak. You rise before the sun and make your way back to the ship where you're master.

                 furiousfirstmate                
      
         luscahunt
    I thank him for the information.
      You push the pouch back to him to make it clear you're not interested in his money. He hides it in his coat with a grin.
	  
       thanks
    I ask him to let his contacts know I've gotten the assignment.
       ((patron) or (patronlie)) 
         thanks
      
        His eyebrow quirks in surprise before he forces his expression into neutral. "Have you had a change of heart about my contacts then?"
        
          "I have to turn a profit to make up for your interruption tonight."
            He spreads his hands and smiles unrepentantly.
             thanks
          "No, but the Lusca is a menace."
            "On that, we certainly agree." He nods.
             thanks
           (privateer < 51) "I have decided to take you up on your offer after all." (Lie.)
             patronlie true
             doubleohagent
             joaquin 30
            He smiles broadly, and a second bag joins the first on the table. "Consider that an advance against further work then," he says cheerfully. "I hope this will be the start of a long and profitable venture for both of us."
			
            You lift your glass. "In the meantime?"
			
             thanks
           (privateer > 49) "I have decided to take you up on your offer after all."
             privateer 50
             patron true
            You're finally convinced that joining the Crown is the best option, and Joaquin is clearly pleased by your new commitment.
             doubleohagent
    I'm not interested in the Lusca.
       ((patron  false) and (patronlie  false)) 
        "We're done here," you say.
	  
        "But you stand to make a good profit…."
	  
        "I stood to make a good profit before your interference," you remind him. You leave the taberna without looking back.
	  
         docksearch
      
         joaquin -20
        "It's your duty," he scowls. "You've gained the benefits of my contacts' investment. Fulfill your part of the contract."
        
          "I do plenty for the Crown that doesn't involve sea monsters."
            Joaquin hisses for quiet from you over such sensitive information, then stands up abruptly. "I've delivered your assignment," he says curtly. "If you don't follow through, it won't be me who comes to find you next."
			
             docksearch
          I recant. He's right, it's my duty.
             ruthless -15
             joaquin 15
             relieved
            He looks relieved.
             thanks
          I recant, but I'm lying. I'm not going after that thing!
             ruthless 15
             joaquin 15
             relieved

  
    I refuse the payment.
       privateer -30
       greed -30
      "I am not interested in payment from those parties," you say tartly. 
	  
      Joaquin raises an eyebrow. "Perhaps not," he says, taking back the coin. "But you may be interested in the information I have regardless. I have no doubt that of all the captains in the Lucayan, you're one who will be going after the Lusca."
      
        Fine. I hear him out.
           hearmeout
        I have no intention of going after the Lusca.
          "You should have doubts," you say. "I'm not interested."
		  
          "Even if…"
           joaquinlover

            "If what?" you ask, knowing you sound impatient.

            He lowers his voice. "I know your feelings about the Crown, but the ending here is inevitable. If there's a way I can keep you out of the noose, I will. Hear me out. Go after the Lusca. Both Crown and pirate will see you as a hero, and I'll be able to arrange for a pardon for you when all this is over." He breathes deeply, and though he looks as blank as always, you think he's collecting himself. "I don't want to see you hurt."

            You still don't like it, but for his sake…

             hearmeout			
          
             done
        Any information he has, I can find elsewhere.
           done
           joaquin -30
          "We're done here," you say, rising.

          "Fine." Joaquin shrugs. "If you decide you want that information before you leave port, I'm staying at the Tar and Bell."

          "I won't." You turn and see yourself out. 

           docksearch		  
          You make a couple of inquiries around the docks after your contact, but there's little chance he'll show himself if Joaquin—or some other Crown official—scared him off. You kick a rock off the dirt street hard into the water and tromp back to the yawl, taking a circuitous route to avoid being followed.
		  
           grabemandgo
            You touch the pouch under your jacket and try to take comfort in that payment. But you don't particularly like being told what to do, and you definitely don't like being told to do it by the Crown.
          You remain glum all the way back to your ship, and when you explain to Caesar what happened, he spits at the sound of Joaquin's name. "He is trouble," he says firmly.
		  
          "That he is," you say. Your crew loads the cargo from the yawl back into ${flagship}, and you go back to your cabin to figure out just where you'll be able to unload it.
           luscahunt
    I don't touch the payment, but I hear him out.
      You leave the pouch sitting conspicuously between the two of you.
       hearmeout
    I'm a pirate. I take the money.
       grabthemandgo

 luscahunt

The next morning, 
 luscahunt2
the sky is clear, the air is close, and you're happy you're back aboard a ship with sails as massive as ${flagship}'s. With winds this calm aboard the yawl, you'd be paddling to make any headway. At least you've a topgallant that can catch some of the breeze aloft, and though you're not at the speed you'd prefer, you're moving. And you're free of all the trappings of port life.

That afternoon, you're hailed by a familiar ship: the [i]Primavera[/i], captained by Carlito the Fierce, who flags you over for a conversation.

"Greetings, Captain ${moniker}!" Fierce calls through a loudhailer. "Any news of the Lusca from Puerta Ballena?"

  I share the gossip I heard in the taberna.
    You repeat only what everyone else has been saying. Some of it might well be new to Fierce if he's been in other ports.
	
     fierceinfo
  I find out what he knows first.
    Never give out information before getting some in return. "What have you heard?" you call.
	
     fierceinfo
   (bounty) I attack him to collect another pirate bounty from the Crown.
     ruthless 25
    It's dishonorable to attack another pirate when their parley flags are up, but, well, you're a pirate after all.
     ((sail  pistols) > 100)
      It's a short battle. Fierce never saw the attack coming, and you both outsailed and outgunned his ship. You shouldn't make a habit of taking over pirates during parley, lest you get a reputation for it.
	  
      Of course, if the Crown hangs them all, how will anyone know?
       blockade
       bountiedships 1
       wealth 400
       bountiedships  1
        *achieve privateer1
       endif

      You make for the blockade and put up the white flags while the [i]Primavera[/i] limps along in your wake, crewed by the Crown loyalists among your sailors—most of your crew fear the Crown more than want to work with it, but you've found enough others of like mind to be confident in your ability to haul in a bounty.
  
      As you count the coins the Crown Navy lieutenant hands over to you—with disdain you take care to ignore—the man fills you in on the details about the Lusca. Though the lieutenant doesn't know it, it sounds to you like the monster is headed toward San Alfonso, following a pirate vessel, probably ${luscacaptain}.
	  
      "We've heard that even the pirates have put a bounty on the creature," the lieutenant says with barely contained laughter, as though he can't imagine pirates paying a bounty.
	  
      You can't, entirely, either. But you can imagine El Sabio paying one. You sail off well away from the blockade, and the tension among your crew fades. Now you just have to decide where to set your course.
       coursechoice
    
       bountiedships 1
       damage 3
      It's a heated battle. The positioning is all wrong for a broadside, and by the time you swing around, Fierce has guessed what you intend and loaded his own cannons. You take some serious damage to the aft hull—nothing a little time in dry dock won't fix, but you'll be limping along a bit until you can get her repaired. The important thing is that Fierce and his crew took worse damage, and the [i]Primavera[/i] is yours to turn over to the Crown.
       blockade
   (joaquininfo) I tell him what I heard from Joaquin.
    The more people hunting this creature, the better—and if the Crown is offering a bounty, they won't mind that information being shared, either.
	
     fierceinfo
    "Blasted thing's torn through four ships since ${luscacaptain} woke it up," he calls. "Sightings put it headed toward San Alfonso."
	
    "Has anyone seen ${luscacaptain}?" you call back.
	
    Through your spyglass, you see Fierce shake his head. "Still aboard ship, I'd wager. A few of his crew who washed overboard in the first attack made it to Playa Roja. ${luscacaptain}'s got a fast ship. He may be trying to outrun the creature, if it's following him. Meantime, El Sabio has a bounty on it, but you'd have to be a fool to face a creature like that."
	
    After the [i]Primavera[/i] sails off, bearing well away from San Alfonso, Caesar stands next to you, waiting for you to set a course.
     coursechoice
    
      Set course for San Alfonso. We'll meet the creature near port.
         homeportadvantage true
        If it's headed toward San Alfonso, your safest bet is to get there first. Which means you'll need some extra winds. With Caesar at the helm, you have Tinima raise the winds, and soon you're making good headway toward your home port. In a few days, you'll be within sight of land—and hopefully, the Lusca.
         preparation
		
        As you travel, you only have time to do a few things to get ready. How do you prepare to face the Lusca?
        
           ((mermaidfriend) or (mermaidbound)) I make contact with the merfolk.
             preparation 1
            Huge sea monsters seem like just the thing that merfolk would be useful against. You're not entirely sure how to go about reaching the mermaid you encountered on San Alfonso, but between your knowledge,
             flagship  "the [i]Sea Queen[/i]"
              Granny O'Malley's advice,
            and Tinima's skill, you find a way to send a summons through the water. And then you wait.
			
            And wait.
			
             mermaidbound
              You begin to wonder if there was some further magic you should have used to strengthen the binding between you and the mermaid you rescued.
            But then there are ripples in the water, and though the mermaid doesn't appear, you can tell that she's listening through the waves.
			
            "That's a handy bit of cambiar," Tinima says thoughtfully. "What message do you want to send?"
            
              I ask for the Lusca's weaknesses.
                 luscabattle 1
                A giant body like an octopus and a head like a shark, with rows upon rows of sharp, tearing teeth should still have a weakness somewhere. Maybe the merfolk have a story about how to defeat it. You and Tinima work the cambiar to send your message and wait again. After a few hours, a wave crashes over your ship, despite the calm seas, and as the spray touches you, you suddenly have an understanding of the creature. 
				
                 weakspot
                 weakness true
                Like an octopus, the Lusca moves on its arms, and it contains most of its organs in a sac behind its eyes. In order to attack ships while it's stationary, it has to leave two arms on the bottom, making its attacks in shallow water more dangerous: it can't pull a ship under unless it can touch the bottom (though it can squeeze the daylights out of it). Unlike an octopus, its arms open to reveal the pointed muzzle of a shark, with hundreds of rows of teeth within. Like both a shark and an octopus, the Lusca's brain is right behind its eye. That vulnerable point is probably your best bet, although even with knowledge of the weakness, this will be a difficult task.
                 preparation				
               (mermaidbound) I use my favor for the mermaid's aid in fighting the Lusca.
                 luscabattle 2
                 mermaidarmy true
                You and Tinima work the cambiar to send your message and wait again. After a few hours, a wave crashes over your ship, despite the calm seas, and as the spray touches you, you feel an answer. The mermaid will grudgingly be there to fight against the Lusca, along with several of her people. You get the sense that she would not come alone because it would mean certain death.				
                 preparation < 3
                   preparation
                
                   thestorm
              I want to know if there's any way to stop the Lusca without fighting it.
                 luscabattle 1
                You and Tinima work the cambiar to send your message and wait again. After a few hours, a wave crashes over your ship, despite the calm seas, and as the spray touches you, you feel an answer. This Lusca is bound by a curse. As long as ${luscacaptain} has some of Ishmael the Lost's treasure aboard ship, the Lusca will continue to hunt. It might also continue on a rampage after that; it's an unthinking creature with a nasty temper.
				
                You sense that the next bit of information about the creature is included in case returning the treasure doesn't work.
                 weakspot
               (mermaidfriend) I request the help of the merfolk fighting the Lusca.
                 luscabattle 3
                 mermaidarmy true
                You and Tinima work the cambiar to send your message and wait again. After a few hours, a wave crashes over your ship, despite the calm seas, and as the spray touches you, you feel an answer. The merfolk have been chased and hunted by the Lusca, and although they pity it for being bound by a curse, they view it as a threat to their people. They will help you defeat the creature when the time comes. And to help, they also let you know its weakness.

                 weakspot
           (flagship  "the [i]Sea Queen[/i]") I ask Granny O'Malley for advice.
             luscabattle 2
             preparation 1
             damage -1
             weakness true
             rammingspar true
             sail 10
             pistols 10
            "You're out of your mind," says the ghost when you tell her what you're facing. "Who in the name of Davy Jones brought the Lusca to the surface?"
			
            "Captain ${luscacaptain}," you explain. "They found the treasure of Ishmael the Lost."
			
            Granny sniffs, showing you just how much she thinks of that old pirate. "If it's up, then it has to be faced," she acknowledges grudgingly. "It's just like most other fish: none too bright, with its brain behind its eyes. Not that I know how you'll get to that without sinking my ship, unless we attach the ramming spar above the figurehead…."
			
            As Granny speaks, the ship begins to rearrange itself to her description: above the figurehead, a long ramming spar grows into a sharp point. You wonder where the ship came up with the wood to change from one place to another, and hope Granny's cambiar took material from the spare mast you have below rather than anything the ship is currently using.

            You and Granny survey the ship—you walk, she floats—and make other improvements here and there, strengthening the hull at the foredeck and losing a bit of draft to accommodate the growth. By evening, you feel that the ship is in better condition to face a sea monster of any kind.
             preparation < 3
               preparation
            
               thestorm
           (flagship  "the [i]Sea Queen[/i]") I make sure we're shipshape.
             sail 10
             preparation 1
            There's always plenty to be done aboard ship to improve her sailing, but you want to accomplish more than that. Your goal is to make sure she can survive a confrontation with a creature known for pulling ships below.
             ((sail > 65) and (skullduggery > 50))
               damage -1
               rammingspar true
               explosions true
               luscabattle 2
               pistols 10
              With the spare parts you have below, you come up with some planking that will work like armor. You hate losing a spare mast, but you think converting one to a ramming spar will end up being more useful if you have to hit the creature head-on. You have the crew prepare some powder chests—ramshackle triangular devices filled with nails, bits of metal scrap, and a canister of powder, rigged to blow on impact—to give the ramming spar an extra punch when it comes down to the end.
               preparation < 3
                 preparation
              
                 thestorm
            
              But there's only so much you can do with the parts you have. You do your best to make repairs and keep everything in prime condition, but you're at a loss for making improvements while you're at sea.
               preparation < 3
                 preparation
              
                 thestorm
          I consult with Tinima on the best strategy.
             cambiar 20
             luscabattle 1
             holdcreature true
             preparation 1
            That evening, on Caesar's watch, you and Tinima sit in your cabin and discuss the best options. "Cambiar is tricky to work on animals," she says, "though it can be done."
			
            "You've done it?" you ask. She looks incredibly embarrassed, for a moment losing the confidence she's gained since she joined your crew.
			
            Slowly, she nods. "Just before I met you," she explains, "there was a challenge offered through La Universidad to see whether the students of cambiar could direct a fish in the shallows off of Playa del Sol."
			
            "You controlled a fish?" you ask.
			
            She looks a little sheepish. "I controlled a school." She watches your expression to see how you're taking the admission of what created her reputation. "Thousands of fish. I made them dance, then had them circle so fast they created a spout under the water. The instructors said they'd never seen anything like it." She pauses and looks down at the deck. "Most of the fish survived it."
			
            Well. You've known for a long time that Tinima is particularly strong at cambiar, and you wondered why more captains weren't eager to take her on when you first hired her. You suppose that such a power might spook some captains, who'd wonder if she could apply her control to humans as well as fish, but their fear turned out to be your good luck.
			
            "So you think you can control it?" you ask, and she glances you a thanks for not making an issue of her secret.
			
            "I doubt it. But I could confuse it some."
             cambiar > 65
              She looks at you in consideration. "Or you could try to confuse it and I could work obstacles for it from the water and sand. Or the two of us together could try to disable it. I don't think we can defeat it with cambiar alone, but it's certainly a weapon we can use."
               preparation < 3
                 preparation
              
                 thestorm
            
              She shrugs. "I don't think I can defeat it with cambiar, but I can help."
               preparation < 3
                 preparation
              
                 thestorm
          I consult with Caesar on the best strategy.
             luscabattle 2
             pistols 20
             explosions true
             preparation 1
            You and Caesar survey the deck while he's at the helm, discussing your best strategies. You assume the Lusca will be huge—though you don't really know how big, it could pull a ship under.
			
            "As big as it is, I think we're best off ignoring case shot," Caesar advises. "And as much as I don't like the risk of fire, using heated shot might deal more damage to the creature so we can kill it faster."
			
            "We have to plan for its arms to come on deck," you say.
			
            Caesar nods. "I think we keep powder chests on deck, set to explode with a pistol shot," he says. "An explosion under the arm might deter it from reaching up again."
			
            "It might," you say, though neither of you feels entirely confident. You come up with the best arrangement of cannons, easy access to the types of ammunition the crew will need, and a few clever uses for chain shot if the Lusca gets grabby at the right angle.
			
            "We'll kill the creature," Caesar assures you.
			
            "We will," you say, and neither of you acknowledges the other's nerves.
             preparation < 3
               preparation
            
               thestorm
          Nothing. We're as ready as we're going to be.
            You're more concerned about the seas than the Lusca. It's hurricane season, and you can feel in your bones that a storm is brewing.
             thestorm
      Set course to intercept the Lusca.
         intercept true
        You know its rough trajectory, and you can gauge how fast it's traveling. All you have to do is make an educated guess, and you'll hit the Lusca before it gets to San Alfonso.
         preparation
      Set course to intercept ${luscacaptain}.
         intercept true
        If the Lusca is chasing ${luscacaptain}'s ship, then all you have to do is reach him first and the Lusca will come to you.
         preparation
      Set course away from San Alfonso. I've no interest in facing the Lusca.
         homeportadvantage true
        You have far more pressing things to do than battle a sea monster, such as unloading the cargo from the sale Joaquin interrupted. Barranca de Camacho looks like a likely port. It's on the mainland, for one, which should put you well out of the path to San Alfonso, and it's gaining a nickname among the Crown cities as the Puerta de Oro: the Golden Gate. It has a healthy black market, despite the efforts of the governor, and you're sure to make a decent profit.

        Or, rather, you would without a storm rolling in.
         thestorm
        		
        Four days out of Puerta Ballena—four humid, still days, with air so close you could cut it with your cutlass if Tinima weren't freshening the winds—there's a break in the heat. The cool natural breeze is at first a relief.
		
        "Barometer keeps dropping," Caesar says.
		
         sail < 50
          "Have the ship's carpenter reattach it," you respond.
		  
          Caesar looks at you blankly for a moment, as if to see if you're joking. "I mean, the barometer's showing a drop in air pressure," he explains. "Foul weather ahead."
         endif
		
        Tinima closes her eyes and breathes deeply.
         cambiar > 60
          You can feel the tingle of her power stretching out beyond you.
        "There's a storm being born to our west."
		
        Caesar looks to the western horizon. "Any chance we could outrun it if we change our bearings?"
		
        Tinima looks at you, shaking her head. "We could maybe skirt some of the worst of it, but it's going to hit us regardless. We're too close."
        
          Change course to avoid the worst of the storm.
             changecourse
            "Better to skirt it than sail into its center," you say. You take the helm and change your bearings for what you hope will be the edge of the storm.
             sailthrough

            "Lookouts, rig your lifelines," you order, and Caesar relays the order.
             crew > 50
              The lookouts of the current watch jump to, quickly following the order and making their way aloft.
            "Secure the cannons."
			
            Your commands continue, Caesar firing them off as you man the helm. Tinima keeps an eye on the horizon, and none of you are surprised when the veil of clouds blots out the horizon to your west. 
			
            "Close the gunports," you call out, and Caesar bellows it in an echo. "Batten the hatches."
			
            The sky grows overcast, and the sea that was calm as glass this morning is broken by small whitecaps. The barometer continues to fall.
			
            "Douse the fire in the galley," you order.

            You sail into the next watch, and as the sailors of the second watch come up to replace their peers, the sailors who should be off-duty now go instead to man the bilge pumps. 
			
            "Rig your lifelines," you command the sailors still on deck.

            The whitecaps chop the sea into foam, and the rain begins.
			
            "Should we strike the sails?" Caesar asks quietly.
            
               (weatherwitch  false) Strike our sails and wait it out.
                 strikesails
                You head into the wind and strike the sails as the rain turns into a driving squall. Wind and waves toss you around like a toy boat in a toddler's tub.
				
                 (ahab)
                  In the dark and the rain, you stay lashed to the helm, grinning into the gale, the whites of your teeth and your eyes showing in the flashes of lightning that accompany the winds. Your fingers clench the steering wheel, wet all the way to your bones. Waves sweep over the deck, and your crew are dragged about.
                   sailresults
                
                  In the dark and the rain, you stay lashed to the helm. Your fingers clench the steering wheel, wet all the way to your bones. Waves sweep over the deck, and your crew are dragged about.
                   sailresults
				  
                   ((sail > (55foo)) and (crew > (30foo)))
                     fame 30
                     damage 2
                    But no one washes overboard. None of the guns come loose. Lightning cracks around the ship, but none of it strikes the mast. One of the sailors still aloft,
                     ahab
                      who's clearly as mad as you are,
                    calls down through the wind that there are rocks ahead. You change your bearings and the ship groans; you're moving at the mercy of the storm, but your adjustments are enough to make the difference.
					
                    Or luck just really likes you.
				  
                     endofthestorm					
                    Hours pass. The driving rain lightens for a moment before another squall follows on its heels, but with each break in the weather, the rain eases, the winds dampen, and the barometer begins to rise. Longer still and the sky brightens. You hear gulls crying over the crash of waves and patter of rain, and you finally unclench your hands.
					
                    You've made it. You don't know who starts it—you may have even begun it yourself—but soon the crew is shouting in jubilation. They've survived. You've survived. Your ship has survived.
                    
                    You're sure there's damage to be accounted for, but you've made it. You relinquish the helm. Time to find out where the storm has tossed you.
                     tossed
                  if ((sail > (55foo)) and (crew < (31foo)))
                     fame 15
                     damage 5
                    But no one washes overboard. None of the guns come loose. Lightning cracks around the ship, but none of it strikes the mast. Everything seems to be holding together.
				  
                    Until, that is, you hear the sound of your hull smashing into unseen rocks. None of your crew were brave enough—or dedicated enough—to go aloft in this mess. You call for Tinima to determine the damage.
				  
                    "We're not sinking yet," she yells over the howl of the wind. "But we could be if we don't clear these rocks!"
				  
                     rockon
                    
                      Load one of the cannons with a kedging anchor and fire us clear.
                        "We've got to kedge," you say. Normally you would send a dinghy out to drop the anchor so you could pull yourselves free, but in this weather, that would be a suicide mission. "Load the kedging anchor into the fore port cannon."
					  
                        "Loading the cannon, aye," Caesar says and leaps to.

                        It's a gamble; neither the anchor nor the cannon was designed for this.
                         pistols > 55
                          But you know what your guns can do. You give Tinima the helm and aim the cannon yourself. The kedging anchor flies to port, stretching its chain taut before plunging into the sea. You wait agonizing moments as it sinks, worried that it won't catch, that you'll wreck against the rocks….
						
                          "It's caught!" Caesar calls out. "Haul the chain!"
						
                          Your crew winds the chain back around the capstan, straining against the levers as they pull the boat to the anchor, away from the rocks. As soon as the line is short and the anchor can be hauled back up, you do it all again. 

                          When you've gained enough distance from the rocks,
                           anchor						
                          you set two anchors, fore and aft, to keep the ship from drifting back into them. $!{flagship} strains against the lines, but she holds.
                           endofthestorm
                        
                           damage 2
                          But you take the gamble. You watch from the helm as your gunner fires….
 
                          The cannon explodes, taking the kedging anchor, your gunpowder, and your gunner all to Davy Jones. For a moment it looks as though, despite the rain, fire will break out, which would doom you all. But the flames sputter in the squall, leaving you once again in darkness, rocks to one side, storm to the other.
                           damagereport
                           damage > 9
                            It's more than the ship can take. You hear screams from the bilge pumps below that suddenly go silent.
                             abandon
                           
                             rockon
                      Command a wave to lift us clear with cambiar.
                        In a storm like this, convincing a wave to push you is one of the simplest forms of the art. It's something they teach the novices at la Universidad: convincing the elements to do something they want to do anyway, changing only in direction or strength, but not intent.
					  
                         cambiar > 50
                          You let yourself feel the wood that makes the helm, how it connects to the deck, to the hull, and from there to the water that surrounds you. The water is wild, unleashed from the calm weather that came before, unrelenting in its fury.
						
                          You chant. "Push," you tell it with your magic. "Lift us free."
						
                          The next wave obeys. Instead of crashing over the deck, it surges up from beneath you, pushing ${flagship} well away from the rocks. There's a moment when you fear you were too convincing; the wave tips you so far to one side you're almost certain the entire ship will capsize. But then it rights itself, and you can breathe.
						
                          Now that you are clear of the rocks,
                           anchor
                        
                           damage 4
                          You begin an elementary chant, one of the few that you're confident about, and as you speak the last words, you hear Tinima shout through the rain to stop….

                          But it's too late. You've told the elements what to do, and the wave that answers your call lifts you up so high that you're airborne. The ship hovers for just a moment before it remembers that it cannot fly, and it plummets back to the water. Tinima's chanting is suddenly louder than the storm, and a gentle wave cushions your fall, keeping you from completely wrecking against the rocks.

                           damagereport
                      Push off the rocks using spare supplies.
                        In a smaller boat, there would be oars you could use to push off the rocks.
                         skullduggery > 50
                           damage 1
                          For ${flagship}, nothing that small will work—but the replacement spars you have below? Those would work perfectly. You order that they be brought up on deck, and then place your crew at the right intervals; you'll push off the rock and keep pushing off of them until you're clear. It's slow-going work, and there are more rocks than you anticipated when you formed this strategy but, finally, you get free.
						
                          Now that you are clear of the rocks, even if it's only a small distance,
                           anchor
                        
                           damage 2
                          In ${flagship}, nothing that small will work. You wrack your brain for an idea of what supply could work in a pinch, but the replacement mast is far too large, and you can't come up with a solution.
						
                          Your ship continues to take damage while you think, and finally you decide you have to come up with a different solution.
                           damagereport
                      Abandon ship!
                         abandon
                  if ((sail < (56foo)) and (crew > (30foo)))
                     fame 15
                     damage 7
                    And that's when things start to go bad. Your crew has followed all of your orders exactly, but you didn't give them enough orders to keep them safe, it seems. A barrel of salted pork, which you neglected to tell anyone to tie down, goes rolling across the deck in one of the waves, catching a sailor off-guard and slamming into her, ripping through her lifeline as the water drags her off deck. She's gone before anyone can even reach for her.
				  
                    From aloft, one of your lookouts calls, "Rocks to starboard!"
				  
                    You change your heading, but it's not enough in this weather—you just don't have the technique needed to bring your ship to safety in this kind of weather. You hear the sound of rocks colliding with your hull. "Tinima, what's our damage?" you holler over the howl of the wind.
				  
                    She concentrates, then says, "We're not sinking yet, but we could be if we don't clear these rocks!"
                     rockon				  
                  
                     damage 11
                    That's when the cannons start to come loose. One of them crashes across deck, smashing into one of your crew, who is mercifully dead from the impact before being driven overboard. The waves rise higher, and the winds grow stronger, and though you're lashed to the steering wheel, it's all you can do to stay upright. One of your crew vanishes into the water. Another. Hours pass and the weather steadily gets worse.
					
                    None of your sailors were brave enough to stay aloft in this, and so there is no warning when you crash into the rocks. You don't know where they came from—your chart promised open water—but now the waves are driving you harder and harder against them. You hear splintering wood and cries from the bilge pump below. Their screams are suddenly silenced, and the gale howls.

                     abandon				  
                    "Should we abandon ship, Captain?" Caesar cries through the winds.
                    
                      We'll be no safer in the water; we'll stay aboard.
                        Until she actually sinks, ${flagship} is still a better chance for survival in this weather. And even when she sinks, there's a better chance of survival if you can hold onto a spar, which floats better than a person does anyway.
					  
                        "Ready the dinghies," you say, "but we'll stay aboard until the last moment, and we'll do our very best to keep her afloat."
					  
                         sail > 50
                           crew 25
                          You give the orders, and your crew follows them, working as though their lives depend on meeting your expectations. And they do. You send crew members below to see if the bilge pump can be salvaged, and you assign the ship's carpenter to do what he can about whatever has broken through the hull. Tinima does her level best to convince the ship that it's still whole.
						
                          And though whole is an exaggeration, she stays afloat.
                           endofthestorm
                        
                           crew -25
                          You give orders, but the truth is, you're not entirely sure what to do. As the storm rages, things go from bad to worse when a bolt of lightning strikes the mainmast and sends it crashing across the deck. What crew you have remaining is dwindling, and it's really a formality when Caesar broaches the question again.
                           abandon
                      Yes, we'll abandon ship, and I'll be in the first dinghy.
                         greed 25
                         ruthless 10
                         crew -30
                        You're not about to sink with your ship; live to pirate another day! You give the orders and lead the exodus from ${flagship}.
                         terrified
                         fleet -1
                        The waters are truly terrifying, but you're able to make it a distance from the ship as it sinks.
                         flagship  "the [i]Sea Queen[/i]"
                           granny -100
                          And then, just as you're sure she's completely sunk, you see her start to sail away, against the winds. Granny O'Malley raises a fist at you, and the [i]Sea Queen[/i] sails off into the storm, a ghost ship once again. Even if you could find her in whatever port she makes landing at, you're sure that Granny O'Malley will never deign to have you aboard her ship again.
                         endif
					  
                        You wait in the driving rain, hoping that your dinghy will survive the rest of the storm. After a few hours, one squall passes, leaving calmer seas, and though it isn't over yet, you know the end of the storm is in sight. If only ${flagship} had been able to hold out just a bit longer.
                         "Hours Later…"
                        When the weather finally breaks, you see the storm has pushed you not too far from an island. You and your crew make for shore to take stock of your situation. Your dinghies are in relatively good shape, and though the crew is tired, they've survived. What do you do now?
                         leftashore
                      Yes, we'll abandon ship, and I'll be in the last dinghy.
                         greed -25
                         fame 10
                         crew 30
                        You know that the tradition is for a captain to go down with ${pronounhis} ship, but you can't quite bring yourself to do it. Once you see that all your crew are safely aboard dinghies, you tie off the steering wheel of ${flagship} and get aboard the last vessel yourself.
                         terrified
                      Yes, the crew should abandon ship, but I'll stay with her to the end.
                         ruthless -50
                         fame 30
                         heroicdeath true
                        You give the order to abandon ship, and you work alongside Caesar and Tinima to make sure the crew get safely aboard the dinghies. The weather is still frightful, and it's not at all clear whether the dinghies will make it through the rest of the storm. But they'll have a better chance out in the open water than aboard a sinking ship.
					  
                        They'll have a better chance than you.
					  
                        Caesar and Tinima board the final dinghy and wait for you to get aboard. "Come on!" Caesar yells over the howl of the gale.
					  
                        You just shake your head and start to lower the dinghy.
					  
                         ((caesarlover) and (tinimalover))
                          Both Caesar and Tinima scramble for the rail,
                           lastsave
                        if (caesarlover)
                          Caesar scrambles for the rail,
                           lastsave
                        if (tinimalover)
                          Tinima scrambles for the rail,
                           lastsave
                          reaching for you, but you're too quick, and the dinghy drops into a swell of water that pushes it away, out of reach of ${flagship}. You watch them in the driving rain, and you imagine you can still hear them calling out for you, but it's hard to say if the voices are real or only in your head.
                           sinking
                        
                           sinking
                          Once the last dinghy has disappeared into the weather, there's little to do but stand at the helm and wait. You consider trying to make your peace, but peace has never really been your style.
						
                           flagship="the [i]Sea Queen[/i]"
                            You're not surprised when Granny O'Malley appears next to you.
						  
                            "Sorry about your ship," you say halfheartedly.
						  
                            She shrugs. "You did your best by her, and you've stuck with her to the end," Granny says. "I couldn't ask for a better companion for what comes next."
						  
                            You look at her hovering next to you, rain pounding through her onto the deck. "What does happen next?" you ask.
						  
                            She just sticks a ghostly pipe in her mouth and waits next to you in silence.
                           endif
						
                          You hear the crack of the hull as it finally gives way, and do your best not to stumble as the deck shudders beneath you, tilting precariously. You'll go out with your feet firmly on deck and your hand on the helm.
						
                          As the water overtakes the deck, you see him, a figure fashionably dressed in the gray of the storm water from head to toe. The wind and rain seem not to touch him, and he's not perturbed by the precarious tilt of ${flagship}. For the moment, you find that you aren't either, and the wind and rain are leaving you alone for the moment as well.
						
                          The sounds of the storm fade, and everything is oh so quiet. Your ears ring for a moment in the silence.
						
                          "This is a right mess you've gotten yourself into," says the man. He doffs his gray tricorn hat, and you see his face: weatherbeaten and nut brown, grey eyes swirling like the clouds of the storm above.
                          
                            "Get off my ship."
                              The figure laughs, sounding much like the storm's howl. "If you'd like," he says, unoffended. "I did come to offer you a choice, but there's no need to hear me out."
                              
                                "I've already made my choice."
                                  The figure dons his hat again. "Then you've no need to wait it out with me."

                                   deathbydrowning
                                  With that, the sound of the storm returns and the figure vanishes, all at once. The rest is awful; drowning is an unpleasant way to die, though you suppose most ways to die are unpleasant. And at least you're not being hanged for piracy.
								
                                  Then all is dark and silent once again.
                                  _scene 9zdeath
                                "What type of choice?"
                                  He smiles. "Allow me to introduce myself."
                                   allowmetointroducemyself
                                "Who the hell are you?"
                                   allowmetointroducemyself
                            "Who the hell are you?"
                               allowmetointroducemyself
                              He makes a courtly bow in the style of the Crown colonies. It looks strange on him, and you have the feeling that these clothes, for all that they're well fitted, are not what he would prefer either. "I have gone by many names," he says. "Some say I work for the storm goddess Guabancex. Others that I am the guide to Maketaori Guayaba's deathly realm. Some curse me for a devil, others laud me as the son of an old sea god. I am a serpent or a storm or a swift blow to a sailor's heart." His grin flashes like lightning. "You may call me Jones if you like."
							
                              You tighten your grip on the steering wheel, which is as strangely still as the wind and rain around you. Its polished wood is a comfort against your hand.
							
                              "I've come to offer you a second chance at being a legend," he says. "I find that the Lucayan is short one ghost ship lately, and I'm in the market for another. Serve me seven years, and your name will live on long after your final rest."
                               servingdavyjones
                              
                                 (fame > 70) "I'm already a legend."
                                  Jones laughs, a rumble of thunder and a crash of waves together. "So you are. But you could be a bigger one."
                                   servingdavyjones
                                "What service do you require?"
                                  "You'd be free of curses, and know your own mind," he promises. "And as such, it's largely your own decision. You'd pick up the lost souls from the sea, become their captain. You could strike fear or mercy in the hearts of pirates and sailors as you choose. You could be a rescuer or a villain, luring Crown ships or pirates to their deaths in strange waters or steering them clear of obstacles." He shrugs. "It's all the same to me, so long as there are souls to be collected and guided. I've been told I'm fickle."
                                   servingdavyjones
                                "What would become of my ship?"
                                  Around you, ${flagship} begins to piece herself back together. You can't tell if it's an illusion or truth, but suddenly she looks as new, and whole, as the day she was made—even better condition than she's ever been under you, and you've kept her as well as you've been able. But you notice that she has a ghostly hue, vacillating between pearlescent and shadow. "I think we can see that she's well treated," Jones promises.
                                   servingdavyjones
                                "Very well. Seven years of service."
                                   dead true
                                   davyjones true
                                  A contract appears before you, much like the very first contract you signed as a lowly sailor. The terms are loose: seven years of service, but that service is undefined. There is no discussion of payment.
								
                                  A quill appears next to the contract, and you sign, ink the color of blood pressing from the quill into the scroll. The scroll snaps back into a roll as you finalize your mark, and the quill, contract, and storm all disappear in a moment. You have the sense that time has passed; certainly, your crew are no longer in their lifeboats around the ship.
								
                                  Jones taps the rolled-up contract against his palm. "I'll be seeing you," he says.
								
                                  "But what do I do now?" you ask.
								
                                  He gestures with the contract out at the open sea. "Sail, Captain. And see what the future brings. No matter who rules these waters among mortals, the true rulers remain, and you serve them now."
                                  _scene 9zdeath
                                "I'll not be a servant or a ghost. Bring me death."
                                  The figure dons his hat again. "By all means," he says, "you're welcome to it."
								
                                   deathbydrowning
                            "I couldn't let her go down alone."
                              He nods in understanding, then looks at you with those strange eyes. "A noble sentiment. But what if I told you she didn't have to go down at all?"
							
                              "What do you mean?" you ask.
							
                              "Oh, you'll still be dead," he assures you. "But your work—your legend—doesn't have to end."
							
                              The silence around you is almost deafening. "Who are you to make such an offer?" you ask finally.
							  
                               allowmetointroducemyself
               (weatherwitch) Strike the sails and begin shielding the ship with cambiar.
                 witchsails
                You head into the wind and strike the sails as the rain turns into a driving squall. Together, you and Tinima begin chanting, trying to keep your footing as the waves roll beneath the ship and splash across the deck. You hear Caesar call orders from the helm and your crew's voices shouting out in the noise of the storm, fighting the waves as you work to get the shield into place.
				
                 (cambiar > (65foo))
                  Your voices crescendo together, and just as the highest wave thus far is about to crash into you and drag you from your feet, it hits a shield of air. The deck levels. The water beneath you and the air around you all stills. The howling of the winds falls to an eerie silence.
				  
                  Tinima's face breaks into a wild smile. "We've done it," she says quietly. And then she resumes her chanting, maintaining the change you've put into place.
				  
                  You and the crew watch the storm rage beyond your protective shell of air. Lightning strikes the water as though your tall mast doesn't even exist. Once, a wave that would have swept the ship into the air and sent it crashing when it fell completely drowns the shield. Your voice joins Tinima's to make sure that the air holds.
				  
                  But there's no need to worry. Your magic is strong, and soon you bob back to the surface—or the surface returns to where it is supposed to be—and you watch the storm rage around you once again. It's eerie, and more than one of the crew make signs against the supernatural. You're safe, but the mood is tense, and you find that your hands have clenched of their own accord.
                   endofthestorm
                
                  But you've let the storm go on too long; not even Tinima's considerable abilities can get you out of it. A wave crashes into the two of you, and though you're both lashed to the deck, you go sprawling. As you regain your feet, Tinima stands, sputtering; you've never seen her so disheveled by the weather.
				  
                  "It's no good," she calls over the howling wind. "We have to sail through it. I'll do my best to minimize the damage!"
				  
                  You follow your safety line to the helm; Caesar stands to one side to return your command, but he stays close, unwilling to abandon you to the storm. The waves once again pound the deck, sweeping your crew from their feet, and drenching you to the bone.
                   sailresults
              Reef the sails for now; we can get a little farther before we strike them completely.
                 foo 10
                You're not foolish—you know you can't keep going full speed during weather like this. But you think you can get just a bit more out of these winds before you strike sails completely. The weather builds, the winds flying across your deck, and if you hadn't already reefed the sails, they'd be full to bursting. As it gets more dangerous to be aloft, you decide it's time to ride out the storm.
                 whichwitchiswhich
                 weatherwitch

                   witchsails
                
				
                   strikesails
              Keep our sails just a bit longer….
                 foo 20
                 damage 1
                You want to get as much distance as you possibly can before you strike the sails. As you sail, the weather builds, the winds flying across your deck, threatening to burst the sails. With a crack, one of them splits at the seam, making it more difficult for your crew to bring them in, and making it far more difficult for you to control the ship.
				
                 whichwitchiswhich
           (cambiar > 65) Use cambiar to protect the ship through the storm.
             whatstorm
             weatherwitch true
             cambiar 10
            "We'll deflect the worst of it," you tell Tinima, and she nods.
			
            "It will still be difficult going," she says. "Best to take the usual precautions."
			
            "And so we will," you say, taking the helm.
             sailthrough
          Keep our heading, storm be damned.
             ahabingit
             foo 10
             ahab true
            "Better to be in open water than dashed against the rocks," you say, and while it's true, you sense that both Caesar and Tinima would be happier if you'd considered adjusting your course. You take the helm and hold it steady, glaring into the horizon, daring the weather to test your will.
			
            You hear one of your crew murmur, "$!{pronounhe}'s mad!" But you can't quite tell if it's said in disapproval or awe.
             sailthrough
          Make for shore.
            In the Lucayan, you're never too far from an island, though most of them are little more than a rock and some trees, with no freshwater to make them habitable. You quickly consult your charts and find an island with a bit of a harbor not too far away.
			
             (sail < 50) 
              Your plan is to get to the island and moor ${flagship}, and hopefully have time to put together some temporary shelters to protect you and your crew from the worst of the rain. It sounds perfectly reasonable when you describe the plan to Caesar and Tinima, so you're surprised when they both protest immediately.
				
              "Mooring during a storm makes the ship more likely to take damage from banging up on the rocks," says Caesar.
				
              "There's no guarantee we'd find shelter, or enough materials to make shelter, on an island of that size," Tinima says on top of him.
				
              "You've got to stay far enough off the coast—"
				
              "If the ship takes damage, we'd be stuck with limited freshwater—"
				
              You see how this is going.
              
                Change course to avoid the worst of the storm.
                   changecourse
                 (cambiar > 65) Use cambiar to protect the ship through the storm.
                   whatstorm
                Keep our heading, storm be damned.
                   ahabingit
                Sail to the island's leeward side and moor safely off the coast.
                   leeofthestone
                 (ruthless > 65) I said we're disembarking, so we're disembarking!
                   tinima -50
                   caesar -50
                   fame -30
                  Caesar and Tinima look at each other and you wonder, for a moment, if they will mutiny right here and now. They don't, but you think it was a real possibility. Caesar sets course for the island, and Tinima weaves the weather to get you there as quickly as possible while you order the crew to prepare to make a landing, taking all your freshwater with you. The island comes into view a few hours later.
				
                   crew < 40
                    It's at that point that your fears of mutiny become real.
                     caesar < 50
                      And it's Caesar leading them against you.
                    The whole crew draws on you, and not one of them comes to stand at your side.
					  
                    "We won't endanger all our lives on a bad order," Caesar says quietly. "You're welcome to disembark, Captain. You'll just have to take the dinghy."
					  
                    With all those pistols pointed at you, there's nothing to do but get in the dinghy and row to shore, watching as your ship—your ship!—sails off. You're able to make a bit of shelter,
                     skullduggery > 65
                      and even a device to collect rainwater,
                    before the worst of the rain hits. You're not exactly cosy and dry, but you're comfortable enough. Through the driving rain, you can't see ${flagship}, and you're torn between hoping that she makes it through the storm and that she's dashed to pieces with the traitors onboard.
					  
                    The island's edible plants, a few rodents, and a stray gull get you through the next several days. After that you start to lose count. You're half-delirious by the time some smugglers find you, and then, the news isn't pretty. Anne Read lost her ship in battle against the Lusca, and the Pirate King made a legendary last stand against Crown forces invading San Alfonso, making what's left of San Alfonso the newest Crown port. Life is getting increasingly tough for pirates, and letters of marque are harder and harder to come by. Any ships owned by known pirates, such as you, have been seized or destroyed whenever they've been found.
					  
                    In short, you're left with nothing. But then, you started off with nothing once before. You can always rise again.
                    *achieve onebullet
                     marooned true
                    _scene 9xending
					  
                  
                     fleet -1
                    You feel the tension from your crew about your order, but they trust you well enough to see this through, and they begin to unload supplies to shore in the dinghies as their crewmates weigh anchor. Everyone gets ashore just as the first raindrops start to fall, giving you precious little time for shelters before the storm starts in earnest. Sailors drag the dinghies inland while the ship's carpenter directs others in lashing together odds and ends and spare sailcloth into tents. It's not ideal, but it'll keep the worst of the weather off your heads.
					  
                    And then the skies open up, and there's nothing to do but wait it out. Moments, hours, days—you can't tell how much time passes before you hear the deafening crack of ${flagship}'s mast, the scream of her hull on the rocks of the island. You go outside into the worst of the storm just long enough to watch her death throes against the rocks of the island.
                     flagship  "the [i]Sea Queen[/i]"
                      And then, just as you're sure she's completely sunk, you see her start to sail away, against the winds. Granny O'Malley raises a fist at you, and the [i]Sea Queen[/i] sails off into the storm, a ghost ship once again. Even if you could find her in whatever port she makes landing at, you're sure that Granny O'Malley will never deign to have you aboard her ship again.
                     endif
                     flagship  "the [i]Bella Niña[/i]"
                       ownnina false
                     flagship  "the [i]Twilight Maiden[/i]"
                       owntwi false
                     ownrename
                       ownrename false
					  
                    So, now you're ashore with limited supplies, dinghies, and some rudimentary weapons including swords, pistols, and a couple of harpoons.
                     explosions
                      You've also got the powder chests, if they stay dry enough to work after the storm's over.
                    Eventually, the storm abates, and there is calm.
                     leftashore
					  
                    By luck or by fate, the day after the storm, you see sails approaching the island.
                     signal
                     damage 0
                     luscabattle 0
                    
                       (fleet > 0) I think that's one of my ships!
                        The Lucayan isn't that large, it's true, and the odds of one of your ships showing up the day after your flagship sank is unbelievable. But there she is, clear as day, and you're relieved that the loss of ${flagship} will not deter you from stopping the Lusca.
						  
                         ownnina
                           flagship "the [i]Bella Niña[/i]"
                          The [i]Bella Niña[/i] is as fine a ship as she was when you bought her—finer, in some ways, because you had to touch her up in order to keep her away from the Crown agents hunting for her old captain. The sailor you hired to captain her, Cora Dusk, isn't entirely pleased to turn over the helm. But you do, after all, own the ship, so there's little she can say other than express her hope that you'll soon have another flagship for your fleet.
                           backinaction
                            
                          Now that you're back on deck, you have a chance to get your bearings and figure out your next steps in taking on the Lusca.
                           tossed
                        if owntwi
                           flagship "the [i]Twilight Maiden[/i]"
                          The [i]Twilight Maiden[/i] is a sight for sore eyes. You had to invest a bit in her to get her seaworthy after you bought her, but it's been worth it. She may not be the pride of your fleet, old lady that she is, but she's reliable, and her captain, Diego Carlito, is a charming sort of rogue who views handing his crew over to you as a vacation from responsibility. Caesar recommended against hiring him, and the look he gives you at Carlito's casual disrespect reminds you of those conversations at the beginning of your career, but Carlito has done well enough by your bottom line that you don't immediately correct his behavior.
                           backinaction
                        if ownqueen
                           flagship "the [i]Sea Queen[/i]"
                          The [i]Sea Queen[/i] looks halfway to being a ghost ship, and when you get a good look at Rodrigo las Casas, the sailor you hired to captain her, you get the sense that Granny O'Malley has been haunting him rather heavily. She appears next to him with a disapproving scowl at all of you. On the upside, las Casas is eager to hand over the helm to you. You suspect you'll have to find a new captain for the [i]Sea Queen[/i] when you return to San Alfonso, if you decide against using her for your flagship.
                           backinaction
                        
                           flagship "the [i]Last Resort[/i]"
                          Among the ships you captured is one you refitted and named the [i]Last Resort[/i]. She's not much to look at, but that's part of her appeal. She's speedy, with a good cargo size, and she's unassuming enough that she's not immediately recognized as a pirate ship. She also sports a good number of cannons, and that's exactly what you'll need going into battle.
                           backinaction
                      Send up a signal and capture the ship when it comes to rescue us.
                         ruthless 10
                         fleet > 0
                          One of your ships showing up just as you've lost your flagship? The odds of that would be unbelievable, and you don't trust your first look through the spyglass. That ship may be flying one of your flags, true, but it's not one of yours. Which makes you wonder if the captain saw your ship go down and is trying to conscript your crew, or if they've been capitalizing on your name prior to this.
                         endif
						
                        The ship responds to your signal with flags welcoming you aboard, so you prepare the dinghies and set out for the ship. Your crew is tense; you've done this type of boarding action before, but not without a flagship to return to. Everything relies on the combat ability of your crew, because there's little chance that you'll take the ship by surprise.
						  
                        Your dinghy is hauled up first, and you make a show of introducing yourself as more of your crew get aboard. "I am Captain ${moniker}," you say grandly. "And this," you continue, "is now my ship."
                         battle
						  
                         pistols > 65
                          The battle is shamefully easy. The ship, manned by do-gooders, was clearly not ready for this type of betrayal of their kindness. Such naïveté wouldn't have gotten them far in the Lucayan, even without your interference.
                           battlechoice
                          
                            Execute the Captain and the crew.
                               ruthless 30
                               fame 10
                              You've enough crew to man this brig without the extra hands to split your booty among, and you're determined to make a name for yourself as one of the most ruthless and bloody pirates in the Lucayan. You order your crew to kill them all and throw them overboard.
							  
                               rename
                              Now, after naming your new flagship, you can set course for the Lusca.
                              
                                The [i]Cut and Run[/i].
                                   flagship "the [i]Cut and Run[/i]"
                                   tossed
                                The [i]Lusca[/i].
                                   flagship "the [i]Lusca[/i]"
                                   tossed
                                The [i]Coquí[/i].
                                   flagship "the [i]Coquí[/i]"
                                   tossed
                                 not(choice_randomtest) 
                                  I don't like any of those names.
                                    *input_text flagship
                                     tossed
                            Maroon the Captain and the crew.
                              You've enough crew to man this brig without the extra hands to split your booty among. The island is safe enough, and obviously ships pass by frequently enough that the Captain and crew will get picked up before they get too hungry.
                               rename
                            Maroon the Captain and conscript the crew.
                              Good sailors who know their ships are hard to come by. And while these may not be seasoned fighters, they're handy enough. You set the former captain off in one of the dinghies and prepare to make way.
                               rename
                            Offer to let the Captain and the crew join you.
                              "Who was the captain of this ship?" you ask after the crew has given their final surrender.
								
                              A man steps forward from the crew, dressed no better than his sailors. "Rob Stevenson," he says, bravado shaking in his voice. His only distinguishing feature is a pair of glasses perched on his nose. You get the immediate impression that he was once an armchair sailor, and while he's got more practical experience now—he has a sailor's musculature—he came to the sea with the head of an academic. He could be useful to you eventually, so long as he doesn't try to take back the ship.
								
                              "Well then, Stevenson, will you stay aboard and join my crew?" You let the implied "or" dangle in front of him, and you watch his imagination do your work for you.
								
                              "Aye aye, Captain," he says. You have Caesar put together a rudimentary contract and have Stevenson and his crew sign. They quickly meld into your own crew, and despite the violence with which you encountered them, you think they'll make fine additions to your fleet.
                               rename
                        if pistols > 50
                           damage 2
                          These are no trusting souls welcoming you onboard, and they're prepared for your treachery. They leap into battle, but though they show spirit, they haven't the skill of your crew. You lose some sailors, but you take more of the ship's crew with you.
                           battlechoice
                        
                          These are no trusting souls welcoming you on board, and they're prepared for your treachery. Too prepared, it seems; they easily disarm you and the first dinghy-full of sailors they brought on board. Their captain, a scholarly-looking man named Stevenson, offers the rest of your crew the opportunity to join his crew or stay in the water on their dinghies until another ship comes to rescue them.

                          You're taken below before you can see how many of your crew take him up on the offer.
                          
                          You stay in the brig for an unknown amount of time, but it isn't long before you hear the Captain yelling across to another ship about turning you over to the Crown for a bounty. The exchange is made, and you are taken aboard a Crown Navy vessel without ceremony.
                           tinima > 50
                            Tinima, her head held high, stands next to you to face justice.
                           caesar > 50
                            Caesar gives you a nod as he, too, prepares to meet his fate at the hands of the Crown.
                           endif

                           ((patron) or (patronlie))
                            The captain of the naval ship, a well-groomed officer without a speck of dust or sea salt on his uniform, looks down his nose at you. "Well," he says, looking over a docket. "I see here that you've friends among my superiors. I'll turn you over to them to see what they'll do with—" He sneers. "—privateers like you."
							  
                            And so you wait. And wait. Finally, you reach port, where a minor clerk gives you the news. Anne Read lost her ship in battle against the Lusca, and the Pirate King made a legendary last stand against Crown forces invading San Alfonso, making what's left of San Alfonso the newest Crown port. Life is getting increasingly tough for pirates, and letters of marque are harder and harder to come by. Any ships owned by known pirates, even privateers such as you, have been seized or destroyed whenever they've been found. The Crown no longer has need for privateers like you now that they've cut off the head of the pirates in the Lucayan.
					  
                            In short, you're left with nothing but your life. But then, you started off with nothing once before. You can always rise again.
                             joaquinlover
                              And if you decide to make an honest life for yourself, Joaquin will be there to rise at your side.
                            _scene 9xending
                          
                            The captain of the naval ship, a well-groomed officer without a speck of dust or sea salt on his uniform, nearly executes you where you stand. "You'll meet the Crown's justice," he promises with a sneer, and he sends you to the brig.

                            Where you wait. And wait. You hear gossip among the crew that the Crown has defeated the Pirate King and taken San Alfonso. They say that Anne Read lost her ship in battle against the Lusca. They say that the pirates are broken, and soon the Lucayan will be safe for all of the Crown's citizens.
							  
                            It sounds rather bleak when it comes to the possibilities for your fate.
							  
                            Finally, you reach Puerta Ballena. You're ushered ashore to a jeering crowd and the sight of decaying corpses in cages. Your trial is a hasty affair, because no one cares about your fate.
                            
                              Plead guilty and go down spitting in the Crown's eye.
                                 fame 10
                                 dead true
                                 warningdeath true
                                You make no apologies for your behavior: you were a pirate through and through, and the Crown can go to Davy Jones. You spit in the executioner's eye for good measure, and the crowd cheers for the spectacle, as well as for your death. The hanging is unpleasant, but you suppose most ways to die are.
                                _scene 9zdeath
                              Plead guilty but ask for clemency for your crew.
                                 crew 30
                                 dead true
                                 fame 10
                                 ruthless -50
                                 warningdeath true
                                 ((tinima > 50) and (caesar > 50))
                                   executioncompany "Caesar and Tinima"
                                   crewhanging
                                if ((tinima > 50) and (caesar < 51))
                                   executioncompany "Tinima"
                                   crewhanging
                                if ((caesar > 50) and (tinima < 51))
                                   executioncompany "Caesar"
                                   crewhanging
                                
                                   executioncompany "your crew"
                                   crewhanging
                                  You take the blame. You look at ${executioncompany} and claim all the acts of piracy for your own head, begging the court to spare everyone else associated with you.
									
                                  But it's no good. The story makes an impression even before you are hanged, and you hear yourself called the Honorable Captain ${moniker}. In the end, though, it's only the story that changes. The deaths are all the same. The hanging is unpleasant, but you suppose most ways to die are.
                                  _scene 9zdeath
                              Plead innocent.
                                 fame -10
                                 dead true
                                 warningdeath true
                                "This is all a misunderstanding," you say, and the jeers of the crowd grow louder. The judge overseeing your trial has no pity, and you are led to the noose without further delay. The hanging is unpleasant, but you suppose most ways to die are.
                                _scene 9zdeath
                               (male  false) Plead my belly (tell the judge I'm pregnant).
                                The judge sighs and consigns you to life in prison—at least until after your supposed baby is born, when you may well be hanged anyway. And there, in prison, you're largely forgotten about. It's the window you need, and within a fortnight, you've found a way to escape.
								  
                                 (tinima > 50)
                                  Tinima, following your lead, made the same plea, and you're able to get her free as well. The two of you head as far away from the city as you can. 
									
                                 endif
                                You have nothing left to your name. But then, you started off with nothing. There's always the chance you can rise again.
                                _scene 9xending
                      Send up a signal and enlist the rescue ship in the Lusca hunt.
                         fleet > 0
                          One of your ships showing up just as you've lost your flagship? The odds of that would be unbelievable, and you don't trust your first look through the spyglass. That ship may be flying one of your flags, true, but it's not one of yours. Which makes you wonder if the Captain saw your ship go down and is trying to conscript your crew, or if they've been capitalizing on your name prior to this.
                         endif
						
                        You're welcomed aboard somewhat hesitantly. The crew of this brig know better than to expect their generosity to be rewarded when rescuing stranded sailors. But you make a show of greeting them in good faith. The first mate eyes you warily, but you press on.

                        "We're glad you found us!" you say, waiting to introduce yourself until you determine where this crew stands with the Crown. But you explain your mission: facing the Lusca. "It's a glorious quest, and sure to be well rewarded. Will you help us?"
						
                         parley > 50
                           fleet 1
                          Your passion, or your promise of a reward, convinces them. The Captain, a bespectacled young man by the name of Rob Stevenson, takes your hand in friendship—and, after some conversation about your plans and your own operations in the Lucayan, he eagerly signs aboard your fleet. It seems he has been waiting for an opportunity like this to present itself. He suggests that you give the ship a new name to mark the occasion of joining your fleet.
                           rename
                        
                          The first mate laughs in your face. It was worth a try.
                          
                            Buy the ship.
                               wealth -50
                               fleet 1
                              You offer fifty doubloons for the ship, which isn't much, but it's a payment upfront of more than the Captain, a young bespectacled man by the name of Robert Stevenson, can afford to turn down. The ship and its crew are yours, for the duration of their contracts, and Stevenson agrees to stay aboard as a crewman, fifty doubloons richer than he was before.
                               rename
                            Take the ship by force.
                               battle
                             (crew > 65) Hunt the Lusca in our dinghies.
                               ahab true
                              If that's the way it is, you don't need a ship. You can do this on your own, with nothing but your dinghies and your crew. And despite the mess you're currently in, your crew has faith in you.
								
                              "It's a mad idea," Caesar says to you as you row away from the ship.
								
                              "If it fails, I don't know how many of us I can save," Tinima confesses.
								
                              "Then we'd best not fail," you say with a mad grin.
								
                               dinghyhunt
                      Hunt the Lusca in our dinghies.
                        You were able to save the ship's harpoons before it sank, and you know that whalers often face down their prey with nothing more than a harpoon, some rope, and a crew full of sailors willing to hold on for their lives.
						  
                        "You're mad," Caesar says, too surprised to censor himself in front of the crew.
                         crew > 65
                           ahab true
                          But your crew have trusted you this far. They may not be aboard ship, but they are still alive. And although your schemes have not always panned out, when they do the profit—and fame—outweighs the risk.

                          "When do we start?" someone calls out from the crew, and there are cheers of agreement. Even Caesar, who knows this to be a fool's errand, begins to grin.
							
                          Tinima sidles up next to you. "If this fails, I don't know how many of us I can save," she says.
							
                          "Then we'd best not fail," you say cheerfully.
                          
                          You cast off, out of the way of the sailing ship—which could be working for the Crown, or could be looking for the opportunity to conscript sailors into its own crew.
							
                           dinghyhunt
                           dinghy true
                          You're not worried about the Lusca. You're confident this plan will work. The bigger challenge you have ahead of you is actually finding the creature out here in the open water. You make for San Alfonso, knowing the monster was headed that way, and aware that you're making much slower progress than any sailing vessels.
                           tossed2
                        
                          And he's not the only one. The crew are grumbling, and before you have a full-fledged mutiny on your hands, you reconsider your options.
                           signal
             (sail > 51)
              Any captain worth the charts they set sail by knows that it's safer for your ship to be at sea during a storm than too close to land. Moored just off an island, a ship's likely to take more damage, so while it's tempting, you face the very real possibility of being stuck on an island with no freshwater and with your ship dashed to pieces against the rocks.
				
               leeofthestone
              You set course for the island as the winds pick up, and the tension on deck is almost as thick as the humid air of yesterday. It's only a few hours before you see the island and make for the side providing shelter from the winds. You'll still get hit with the weather, but it's a safer position than you'd have otherwise—assuming the storm lets you stay in one place.
               sailthrough
				
 tossed
You're not on course, that's for certain. It takes you some time with the charts, but you figure you're a day or two's sailing south of where you would have been before the storm.
 homeportadvantage
  It puts you southeast of San Alfonso, and you adjust your heading accordingly, hoping you'll make up the lost time faster than the Lusca.
   tossed2

  It's hard to tell if the storm will have impacted the other players. Could ${luscacaptain} have kept his lead on the monster? Or is he likely to have sunk in the Lusca's tentacled grasp by now, with the creature retreating back to the depths from which it came?
   tossed2

 tossed2
 modifier ((damage-luscabattle)*5)

Luck, or fate, intervenes. A day out from the little island where you took refuge, you see four ships at points on the horizon. To your northwest, there's a small, but fleet, ship flying the colors of Captain ${luscacaptain}. To the northeast, you see the [i]Bonney Lass[/i], Anne Read's flagship, limping along at a fraction of her normal speed. And directly north, a Crown ship and a ship flying the colors of the Pirate King are engaged in battle.
							
And though it takes a longer look through the spyglass, you realize that the churning waters around the battling ships are not just cannon fire: there's a monster. You've found the Lusca, and there's no time to lose.

  Make for ${luscacaptain}'s ship.
     cursebreaker
    If you can get to ${luscacaptain} and convince him to throw the treasure of Ishmael the Lost back to the Lusca, there's the chance that the creature will return to its watery domain. It might be too late for all of that now, but it's worth a try.
	
    You set a course to intercept Captain ${luscacaptain}, and with a little added boost to the winds by Tinima, you make good time—certainly better time than Anne's wounded ship or the two ships locked in combat with the creature. Soon, you come alongside and fly up the flags requesting permission to board. ${luscacaptain} doesn't want to slow down, not when the Lusca is distracted enough that he has a chance to put some distance between them, but when he sees your cannons, he decides to make time for your request.
	
    Once aboard the ship, what is your plan?
    
      I convince ${luscacaptain} to return the treasure.
         blackguarddead
          Captain Temerario laughs at your request. "Truly? You think throwing away Ishmael the Lost's treasure into the sea will stop that thing from attacking?"
		  
          "I do," you say firmly. "The theft of the treasure woke it. Returning the treasure will send it back to sleep."
		  
           parley > (65modifier)
             convincedme
            ${luscacaptain} shrugs. "Fine. I suppose 'tis worth a try if it keeps that monster from following me across the Lucayan." He glances overboard. "And 'tis shallow enough here that if ye're wrong, we might be able to dive for it later on."
			
            It's not the most encouraging of answers, but at least ${luscacaptain}'s willing to listen to reason. You help retrieve the coffin of Ishmael the Lost, filled to the brim with stolen treasures, from where it's kept in the captain's cabin. It's a beautiful thing, even after all these years: there's scrimshaw laid into the wood depicting the whale hunt of Ishmael's infamous captain before Ishmael mutinied and took over the pirate ship. Even without looking inside, you understand why it's so tempting.
            
              I'll try to kill the Lusca if ${luscacaptain} will split the treasure.
                 split true
                "Maybe that won't be necessary," you say, your gaze still lingering on the coffin. "If I kill the Lusca, what would my share of the treasure be?"
				
                ${luscacaptain}'s eyes light up in greed. There's not much time for bargaining—not with the Lusca still headed toward ${luscacaptain}'s ship—but you eventually talk him up to a full third of whatever is inside the coffin. That, plus the reward for killing the Lusca, will make you a pretty penny. If, that is, you can survive it.
                 dinghy
                  Especially given that you only have a dinghy under your command.
                
                  We'll fight from ${luscacaptain}'s ship, whether he likes it or not.
                     ruthless 20
                     ahababoard false
                    It's the lives of ${luscacaptain} and his crew on the line. They ought to be grateful for your help, even if it has to be at gunpoint. 
                     folly
					
                    "I'll not risk my ship to this folly!" says ${luscacaptain} angrily as you lay out your plan.
					
                    But then the Lusca is on the horizon, and there's no time to continue the argument. ${luscacaptain}'s complexion dulls as he sees the creature and reads his fate in its shark's maw.
                     explosions false
                     rammingspar false
                     theendisnigh
                  We'll fight from ${luscacaptain}'s ship as a team to secure the treasure.
                     ruthless -20
                     ahababoard false
                    "We'll need to adjust course," you tell ${luscacaptain}.
                     folly
                   (dinghy) To the dinghy!
                     nantucketsleighride
                   (dinghy  false) My ship is prepared; we'll fight from ${flagship}.
                     theendisnigh
                    You, Caesar, and Tinima stand at the helm, watching the Lusca spear toward you, its wake larger than a small cutter. You've made all the preparations you can; now is the time to see if your wit and nerve can stand against a monster from the deep.
                     rammingspar
                      You set a course to meet it head-on, knowing a target that large will be hard to miss.
                       weakness
                        In a perfect world, its eyes will surface at the right angle for you to spear one, but even if you can't make a direct hit at its weakest point, you're sure to inflict some damage.
                     endif
                    
                    "Ready the harpoons and brace for impact!" you shout. Your crew moves into position, and the Lusca's massive head rises to the surface, rows upon rows of teeth glimmering in the spray. Its eyes, round and luminous as the moon, stare at you in hatred.
                     mermaidenemy
                      Then, rising to the surface all around it, mermaids and mermen, with tridents and nets and cast-off cutlasses. They're draped in sunken riches, corroded from years beneath the waves. And, like the Lusca, their teeth are sharp and designed for ripping. Rather than attacking the Lusca, they're making straight for your ship.
					  
                      All hell breaks like stormy waves against a rocky shore. Your crew erupts into action, harpooners taking whatever shots they can on the Lusca, and everyone else firing pistols into the fray.
                       (sailpistols) > (125(2*modifier))
                        Some lose their heads in the terror of the image facing you, but most keep their wits about them enough to stay on their lines, keeping control of the ship. You fire, taking a mermaid between the eyes—an impressive shot in calm circumstances, let alone this chaos—and call out course adjustments. Your original strategy didn't take a mermaid army into account, and staying afloat with so many enemies in the water is no sure thing.
						
                        You feel the winds shift as Tinima fills your sails, putting you back in position to attack. 
                         explosions
                          Some enterprising members of your crew start chucking the powder chests overboard, and the explosions burst on the surface of the water. The blasts are loud, and the mermaids scream in dismay, fumbling in the water against the noise. "Fire cannons!" you holler. If just the noise will knock them off kilter, it doesn't matter if you hit or not. But whoever loads the cannon with chain shot is feeling efficient, and the ammunition rips through the mermaids below.
                         endif
						  
                        You come around, adjusting your course to meet the creature. The Lusca rises, its massive jaws ready to take a bite out of your ship. 
                         eyestrike
                        As it moves, one of its eyes provides an easy target. 
                        
                           (rammingspar) Keep the spar on target….
                            It opens its maw, and you ram straight into the creature's palate. There's a crunching noise, and at first you fear it's the wood of the ship protesting the impact.
							
                            But no, it's the Lusca's skull. The ramming spar's tip comes out right through the Lusca's exposed eye. The creature, so full of motion only a moment ago, is eerily still, its deadweight dragging on your ship.
							
                            "Cut loose the spar!" says Caesar, and the crew is quick to act, despite how close they need to get to the Lusca's rows of teeth. The foredeck tilts toward the waterline as they work, then bobs back as the ramming spar comes free and the Lusca, its thick hide pierced with a dozen harpoons, floats off with it.
							
                             howmuchexperiencedoweget
                          Have Caesar take the helm and spear the thing myself.
                            Caesar transitions into your position at the helm almost before you've left it, and you move so smoothly across the deck it's almost dreamlike. It's teeth—rows upon rows of thousands of daggerlike teeth—bear down on you. The harpoon is cold and wet in your hands. Your knuckles tighten as you grip it, unflinching as the Lusca raises its head. You reach the rail and look the thing in its cold, monstrous eyes.
							
                             pistols > 55
                               fame 20
                               crew 20
                              Slam! You throw the entirety of your weight into the blow, and you feel the harpoon sinking forward, deeper and deeper, so that you're almost drawn into the oozing gel of the wound yourself. A death scream wails from the creature's fearsome maw and it jerks back, taking your harpoon with it. Then it shudders, limp and floating alongside the ship. You lift your arm above your head in triumph, and your crew roars with satisfaction in their captain.

                               howmuchexperiencedoweget
                            
                              But as you thrust the harpoon forward, it glances off the monster's hide. Caesar shouts, both a warning and a command, and your boarding crew snaps into position, their harpoons flying into the Lusca. The deck falls out from under you as the Lusca's teeth razor past your position; you turn and see Tinima chanting, keeping the hull firm, and knocking you out of the way of certain death. She spares a quick nod at you through her concentration, and you touch your forehead in thanks.
							  
                              The death scream of the creature brings you back to the present. One of your crew was lucky enough to strike the close eye with a solid blow. You worry, for a moment, that all they'll remember after this is your failure. But not so.
                               thestory
                          Let Caesar make the killing blow.
                             caesar 20
                            Of all the sailors in your crew, Caesar is the one strong enough, unmoving enough, to make this blow count. As soon as the order has left your lips, Caesar grabs the harpoon next to him and strides across the deck, unflinching as the Lusca raises its head. He reaches the rail. The Lusca begins to open its mouth.
							
                            Slam! Caesar sinks the harpoon deep into the Lusca's eye, and a death scream wails from the creature's fearsome maw. The great creature, so full of movement only a moment ago, shudders and goes limp. Caesar pushes it forward, leaving the harpoon in its close eye, then releases the Lusca to float alongside the ship. He touches his brow almost prayerfully as the creature, its thick hide pierced with a dozen harpoons, drifts away from the hull.

                             howmuchexperiencedoweget
                           (explosions) Throw powder chests into its mouth and fire.
                            This is the command your crew has been waiting for. The Lusca opens its maw to engulf the foredeck, and your sailors loft powder chests into its dreadful mouth. One explodes on impact with the rows and rows of teeth, and that explosion starts a chain reaction; the powder kegs light off each other, making the eruption of pistol shots from your crew an unnecessary but triumphant touch.
							
                            There's not much left of the Lusca's head by the time the smoke clears. The creature's body floats alongside the ship, tentacles limp, a shadow of the fearsome monster it had been in life.
                             howmuchexperiencedoweget
                          Hold steady and offer a reward to the member of my crew who kills it.
                             greed -10
                             crew 30
                            A cheer goes up, and your boarding crew, already armed with harpoons, rushes across the foredeck, all aiming for the close eye. One of them strikes true, and a death scream wails from the creature's fearsome maw. But the fight vanishes from the Lusca's limp body.
							
                             thestory
                            In the years to come, when the story is told, it's you that holds the harpoon and sinks it into the Lusca's close eye, not a lucky sailor on your crew who happened to be in the right position. You know which version of events is true, but your crew recognizes the version that makes the better story.
						
                            And then it's over. The Lusca, its thick hide pierced with a dozen harpoons and one long shaft sticking out of its empty eye, floats beside you, unmoving.
                             howmuchexperiencedoweget
                             mermaidenemy
                              Angry whistles and hoots sound over the water as the mermaid army retreats beneath the waves. They'll be back someday, you imagine, as your actions here have given them more reason to hate you. But that's tomorrow.
                            Today, you have won, and it's a win that will go down in legend.
                             luscadead true
                             luscahero true
                             fame 40
                            *achieve luscahero
                             mermaidarmy
                               mermaidbound
						  
                                But your victory is short-lived. The mermaids who came to your aid surface, all of them looking at you with their strange eyes. One—it might be the one you bargained with in the first place, but it's hard to tell—whistles, and as one the pod of merpeople moves to surround your vessel, their tridents and nets suddenly turned against you.
							
                                Your price has been fulfilled, it seems, and now the mermaid will revenge herself on you for binding her into a deal.
                                
                                  Load the case shot and fire into the fray.
                                     pistols > 55
                                      Case shot would work better on the deck of an enemy vessel, but as your cannons fire into the mermaid army, you find it remains effective. The Lusca's blood mingles in the water with the blood of the mermaids. 
								  
                                      Angry whistles and hoots sound over the water as the mermaid army retreats beneath the waves. Have you given them enough reason to fear you? Perhaps, or perhaps they will return. But that's a problem for the future.
                                       gunsmokechoice
                                    
                                      Case shot works beautifully when there's no escape beneath the waves, but for the mermaids, it's simple enough to avoid. They sink beneath the waves, and your crew cheers—but only for a moment.
                                       merrage
                                      Soon, you hear the screech of your hull coming apart at the seams. Faster than you'd have thought possible, you are sinking, the Lusca's corpse dragging your vessel down as your hull collapses from below. Your crew begin to abandon ship, but there is no salvation in the waves. There are more merpeople than you realized. Far more. And they are angry.
								  
                                      They make no pretension of being civilized, and though you fight your best, it's not long before teeth clamp into your shoulder, your leg, your throat. This is not how you expected to die.
								  
                                      And then there is nothing.
                                       dead true
                                       captainjones true
                                       warningdeath true
                                      _scene 9zdeath
                                  Use advanced cambiar to animate the Lusca.
                                    Only the true experts of cambiar are able to reanimate the dead, and then only for a short period of time.
                                     cambiar > 70
                                      Fortunately, you are one of those masters. The creature shudders, seeming to shake off the call of Davy Jones as it pulls away from your ship. Your crew begin to panic, but the Lusca's body moves away from your hull and into the mermaid force. 
								  
                                      They scatter almost instantly, whether fearing you and your power or fearing the return of the Lusca, you're not sure. You doubt, however, that they'll bother you in the future. It's possible, but that's a problem for later.
                                       gunsmokechoice
                                    
                                      You are not one of those masters. The Lusca shudders, but it remains dead, and the merpeople swarm your flagship.
                                       merrage
                                  Offer them the Lusca's corpse as a peace offering.
                                    It's possible diplomacy could work to remedy the insult you leveled on the merpeople, and so you try it.
								
                                    "Peace!" you call out. "Together, we have done something extraordinary. We have defeated the Lusca! I offer you its body as a trophy, proof that you have done mighty things."
                                     parley > 55
								
                                      You hold your tongue before suggesting that it could also feed their families for the foreseeable future, and it's just as well. After another series of whistles and hoots, part of the mermaid army breaks off to pull the Lusca below the waves with them. One mermaid swims closer—but not too close—and you think it is the mermaid you bound into the contract.
								  
                                      "We are resolved," she says, and you can't tell from the tone if there's a threat, daring you to question her. But you don't. You watch as they sink below the waves, and listen as your crew cheers both your victories.
                                       gunsmokechoice
                                    
  
                                      They seem to be listening, so you go on. "The meat alone could feed your families for the foreseeable future," you suggest.
                                       flagship  "the [i]Sea Queen[/i]"
                                        You register Granny O'Malley covering her eyes and shaking her head, but it's too late.
                                      The merpeople disappear, and your crew cheers—but only for a moment.
                                       merrage
                              
                                The merpeople begin to disappear below the surface, but one swims closer to ${flagship}. "Well done, my friend," she says. "You have done a mighty thing."
							
                                "With your help," you acknowledge.
							
                                "Of course," she responds with a click from her blowhole. "We wish to take one of the creature's tentacles home with us, as proof of this battle."
							
                                It's a little enough thing to bestow, so you grant it. The corpse of the Lusca shakes, and, with a wave, the mermaid vanishes from sight.
                                 gunsmokechoice
                            
                               gunsmokechoice
                              The day is not yet over. The air is still thick with gunsmoke and battle.
                              
                                Sail toward the battling ships.
                                  If the Crown and the Pirate King's ships had worked together against the creature, they might have stood a chance. Now, both hulls are crunched in, and the ships are sinking slowly, still firing cannons at each other as the waves reach up to pull them under.
                                   cannonfodder
                                  
                                    Aid the Crown ship.
                                       privateering
                                      The Crown ship is listing dangerously to starboard. Its broadsides are firing high into the topsails of the Pirate King's ship, but still the sailors go on firing rather than abandoning ship.
								  
                                      There's going to be no saving this vessel. But if you can get alongside without getting hit by the Pirate King's cannons, you can get the Crown sailors, and some of her equipment, off before she sinks entirely. And given that the Pirate King's ship isn't firing any more accurately than the navy ship, it won't be a problem.
								  
                                      You come alongside the Crown ship, raising the Crown's own colors to your mast so they see you as an ally. They might not like privateers in the navy, but since you're coming to their rescue, they've got no cause to complain. Their captain—or acting-captain; it's hard to tell in the din and smoke—comes to the rail as you prepare to board.
								  
                                      "Timely arrival," she says, and the compliment would feel better if she didn't seem so surprised. "Did the [i]Intrépido[/i] send you our way?"
								  
                                      "Should she have?" you ask, getting the gangplank ready to bring the Crown sailors aboard.
								  
                                      The acting-captain calls to three of her sailors to have them ready to keep the gangplank even on their side—a challenge with how high they're tilting. "We sent her off as soon as El Sabio's ship raised the Pirate King's colors. What kind of foolish old man registers a ship, then as good as declares himself the Pirate King? The navy's been waiting to take San Alfonso, and by the Crown, it wouldn't surprise me if they're already en route."

                                      Well. That changes everything. You get the Crown sailors aboard quickly. It wouldn't do to have the navy arrive in San Alfonso before you make it back.
                                       getback
                                    Aid the Pirate King's ship.
                                       godsavetheking
                                      The Pirate King's ship, a merchant bearing the name [i]Aguila[/i], is low in the water; the waves wash back and forth over the deck, and half the cannons are waterlogged or firing directly into the water rather than hitting the navy ship. It looks as though the frightened crew would rather go down fighting than let the Crown ship survive. As it is, there's going to be no saving the [i]Aguila[/i], but you could get her crew, and some of the equipment, on board before she sinks.
								  
                                      A grizzled man with dark skin and a soaked-through hat leans over the rail as you come alongside, but rather than looking glad that you've arrived, he's waving you off.
								  
                                      "You have to make way to San Alfonso!" he shouts. "The Crown Navy is headed to the port!"
								  
                                      "Why?" you call over the sound of cannon fire. As you look down at the damaged ship, you feel as though you've seen her before….
								  
                                      "The [i]Aguila[/i] is on the rolls as El Sabio's ship!" he yells back. "The Crown thinks El Sabio is the Pirate King, and now they have no reason to let the port stand."
								  
                                      That's why you've seen the ship before: she makes port at San Alfonso, and she's one of the completely legal merchant ships that harbor there. If she was carrying the Pirate King's colors, though, that is pretty damning evidence against El Sabio—and all of San Alfonso.
                                      
                                        Make way to San Alfonso and leave the [i]Aguila[/i] to Davy Jones.
                                           getback
                                        Get the sailors of the [i]Aguila[/i] aboard before leaving.
                                          You can't just leave the sailors there to drown. Much to the grizzled man's dismay, you lower the gangplank and insist that he and the rest of the crew board. Only after they're all safe do you set course.
									  
                                           getback
                                        Rescue the Crown sailors instead in hope of a pardon.
                                          You can see which way the wind is blowing now, and while you still need to make it to the port for selfish reasons, you'd rather be on the winning side once the storm settles. You leave the [i]Aguila[/i] and sail to the Crown ship, collecting the sailors before changing your heading.

                                           getback
                                    Wait and pull any survivors out of the water.
                                       imasurvivor
                                       greed -20
                                      Sailing into the middle of combat would endanger your own ship and crew, and it's clear that neither vessel can be saved. Instead, you put some of your crew in dinghies, who will row to the edge of the combat, into the debris, and extend hands to whoever happens to be in the water. Anyone not willing to keep their peace when hauled aboard is summarily thrown back into the water. You're willing to show mercy to those who can be saved, but only if they won't endanger your crew.
								  
                                      That doesn't, however, stop them from arguing once they're aboard your ship. Despite cuffs from Caesar and glares from Tinima, who promises to steal their breath as easily as she commands the wind, you start to pick up parts of the story that chill your blood.
								  
                                      "It won't matter," calls one Crown sailor. "Now that we know the name of your so-called king, you'll all hang!"
								  
                                      "Hold," you command, and you're surprised when they listen. "The Crown knows the identity of the Pirate King?"
								  
                                      The Crown sailor smirks. "That ship that raised his colors belongs to the one called El Sabio. It was disguised as a merchant right up 'til we engaged."
								  
                                      A sailor from the Pirate King's ship protests in panic. "That doesn't mean anything!"
								  
                                      But it will to the Crown. How could El Sabio have been so foolish about registering one of his own vessels? If he isn't the Pirate King, the evidence will be damning enough in the Crown's eyes. And to look at the Crown sailors, they know it.
								  
                                      The Pirate King's panicking sailor looks at you. "We have to get back to San Alfonso. The Crown had a second ship; it disengaged as soon as we raised our flag." Which means the Crown is on its way.
								  
                                      "Throw everyone in the brig until we can sort this out," you tell Caesar. Both Crown and Pirate King sailors protest, but you can't have them on deck and underfoot or at each other's throats.
                                       getback
                                Set course for the [i]Bonney Lass[/i].
                                   bonneylass
                                 (ahababoard) Head to ${luscacaptain}'s ship.
                                   itsyourfault
                      
                         nightmare
                        And, though your crew is seasoned, and you've seen more battle than you can rattle a saber at, they lose their heads. You've heard of it happening before, and as your crew unravels around you, you suspect Davy Jones is somewhere smiling, because he'll have plenty of company tonight. Your sailors leave their positions. They fire into the water, and some fire into themselves, unwilling to meet their ends to a creature of nightmares.
						
                        You call for a course correction. You call for cannons. You call for anything. But no one is listening.
						
                        The Lusca opens its giant jaws, and you think you see its eyes wink a layer of eyelids at you before it crashes into ${flagship} and chomps down on the vessel. Then there is screaming, some of it your own. And then there is blackness.
                         dead true
                         captainjones true
                         warningdeath true
                        _scene 9zdeath
                    
                       (sailpistols) > (100(2*modifier))
                         jonestakeit
						
                         holdcreature
                          You hear Tinima chanting in Maipure under her breath, a rarity for a woman who usually casts silently, and out of the corner of your eye, you see an unusual expression on her face: strain. 
                           cambiar > 65
                            You add your voice to hers, calling on the waves to batter the creature.
                          The Lusca slows, only a little, but it's enough to better your chances of making your impact count.
						  
                           mermaidarmy
                             hippocampuscavalry
                          if explosions
                             boom
                          if rammingspar
                             eyestrike
                          
                             harpoon
                        if mermaidarmy
                           hippocampuscavalry
                          As the waves crash around you, you see heads bobbing on the waves. Horse-like manes spread across the surface moments before you see the full upper bodies of horses, bearing riders that are nearly human. But the resemblance is just close enough to be uncanny; their gray skin glistens with beaded water, and in their seaweed hair, their eyes flash large on the sides of their heads. The mermaids have arrived, bearing tridents and nets and cast-off cutlasses, their hippocampuses surfacing for only seconds before they return below. The Lusca thrashes, and there's blood in the water. Eerie whistles sound as the mermaids surface between attacks, staying well away from the Lusca's maw.
                          
                           explosions
                             boom
                          
                             harpoon
                        if explosions
                           boom
                          Your crew lowers the powder cases over the side as the Lusca closes in. Some are designed to blow on impact, but a few are triggered by explosion. Your sailors throw them ahead of your ship and into the Lusca's path, and as the creature approaches, they fire pistols to ignite them. Some miss—it's a difficult shot—but even those chests explode against the Lusca's tough hide as it comes within reach of your vessel.
						  
                           eyestrike
                        
                           harpoon
                          You imagine you can stare down the creature as it approaches, straight on a course for collision with your ship. "Wait until my command," you yell. Your heartbeat sounds loud in your ears as you wait for an opening. The creature opens its massive jaws, ready to take a bite out of your ship.
						  
                           eyestrike
                      
                         nightmare
              I use the treasure as bait to lure the Lusca here before killing it.
                 bait
                 bait true
                 modifier -10
                 dinghy
                   ahababoard false
                  You lower the treasure over the side with line, making sure it stays attached to the ship. 
				  
                  "What are you doing?" ${luscacaptain} asks.
				  
                  "Lowering the bait," you explain.
                   folly
                
                  You and Caesar take the coffin back aboard ${flagship}, lowering it over the side with line once you've gotten enough distance from ${luscacaptain}'s ship. It doesn't take long before you see the wake of the creature change course. The Lusca has taken the bait.
                   theendisnigh
              I return the treasure to the Lusca and hope it returns to its trench.
                 lower
                 fame 25
                 luscahero true
                 fame 10
                *achieve luscahero
                You lever the coffin over the edge of the ship and watch it plunge into the water below. As soon as it splashes into the water, you see the Lusca—still leagues away, between the Crown ship and the Pirate King's ship—go still. Then it vanishes below the water, speeding toward you and ${luscacaptain}'s ship.
				
                "Prepare for battle!" cries ${luscacaptain}.
				
                You tense, wishing you had returned to your ship. But the Lusca's wake disappears suddenly, and you see it through the clear blue water below, grabbing the coffin in its arms and pulling the treasure of Ishmael the Lost toward its gigantic maw.
				
                Then the water goes black below you and churns in a wake, speeding back toward the deep trench known as Davy Jones's Coffin.
                 itsyourfault
          
            "You just want the treasure for yourself!"
             fightfightfight
        
           blackguardally
            Blackguard looks at you with madness in his eyes, but you stare him down. After a moment, he looks away.
             steeredmewrong
            "Ye've never steered me wrong before, ${moniker}."
			
            He looks wistfully toward his cabin. Finally,
             convincedme
          
            "Give up the treasure of Ishmael the Lost?" Blackguard shrieks, madness in his eyes. "'Tis me life's work, finding that treasure. I'll never give it up! Never!"
			
             fightfightfight
            He lunges at you, his crew watching in trepidation, unwilling to get involved. You draw and shoot, spinning out of the wild swing of his cutlass.
             pistols > (50modifier)
              Red blooms from ${luscacaptain}'s chest, and you can tell the wound should be a mortal one, but ${luscacaptain} doesn't seem to know it yet. He whirls on you, chopping with his sword rather than using any pretense of finesse. You unsheathe your cutlass and parry, darting out from under the rain of blows. ${luscacaptain} chases you across the deck, undeterred by the hits you score on his limbs, until he is bleeding from a multitude of wounds. When he finally falls, it is because he slipped on his own blood, and once down, he's unable to rise again.
			  
              You trace the air in front of you with your bloody sword, gesturing toward ${luscacaptain}'s crew. "Anyone else?" you ask.
			  
              No one takes you up on your offer. The treasure is yours.
              
                Commandeer the ship and its crew before lowering the treasure.
                  "Who's in charge of this lot?" you demand of the crew.
				  
                  ${luscacaptain}'s first mate steps forward. She's a tall woman with two cutlasses strapped across her back, her black hair cropped close to her head. "Anabelle Bleak, Captain ${moniker}."
				  
                  You nod. "You're Captain Bleak now, and you work for me," you say.
				  
                  "As you say, Captain," she answers.
				  
                   luscacaptain "Bleak"
                   fleet 1
                   luscahim "her"
                   comandeered true
                   lower
                Put one of my own crew in charge before lowering the treasure.
                  "You. Gorrión. Take the helm."
				  
                  A slight native woman steps out from your crew and assumes the helm. "Awaiting your orders, Captain."
				  
                  "You're Captain Gorrión now. Anyone who objects can take it up with me."
				  
                  Despite the tension, she smiles. "Aye aye, Captain."
				  
                   luscacaptain "Gorrión"
                   fleet 1
                   luscahim "her"
                   comandeered true
                   lower
                I don't care who's in charge; lower the treasure!
                  As you and Caesar move to pick up the casket, a tall woman with two cutlasses strapped across her back and black hair cropped close to her head starts shouting orders to ${luscacaptain}'s crew. You hear them call her Bleak, which seems appropriate to your situation.
                   luscacaptain "Bleak"
                   luscahim "her"

                   lower  
                I've got something else in mind.
                  What is your plan?
                  
                    I'll kill the Lusca and keep the treasure.
                       fleet 1
                       bait true
                       comandeered true
                      Why give up a perfectly good treasure? It's not as if the Lusca will appreciate the subtlety of using it as bait. The ship seems to be bait enough.
                       dinghy
                        And you have every confidence that, even from a dinghy, you can defeat the beast.
                         nantucketsleighride
                      
                        And your ship is prepared. You, Caesar, and Tinima return aboard, leaving some of your crew on ${luscacaptain}'s ship, now under the command of one your own, a slight native woman with a mean right hook named Gorrión. She'll keep ${luscacaptain}'s rabble in line while you do what needs to be done.
                         theendisnigh
                    I commandeer this ship and use the treasure as bait.
                      "Who's in charge of this lot?" you demand of the crew.
				  
                      ${luscacaptain}'s first mate steps forward. She's a tall woman with two cutlasses strapped across her back, her black hair cropped close to her head. "Anabelle Bleak, Captain ${moniker}."
				  
                      You nod. "You're Captain Bleak now, and you work for me," you say.
				  
                      "As you say, Captain," she answers.
				  
                       luscacaptain "Bleak"
                       fleet 1
                       luscahim "her"
                       comandeered true
                       bait true
                       bait
                    I appoint one of my crew as captain and use the treasure as bait.                    
                      "You. Gorrión. Take the helm."
				  
                      A slight native woman steps out from your crew and assumes the helm. "Awaiting your orders, Captain."
				  
                      "You're Captain Gorrión now. Anyone who objects can take it up with me."
				  
                      Despite the tension, she smiles. "Aye aye, Captain."
				  
                       luscacaptain "Gorrión"
                       fleet 1
                       luscahim "her"
                       comandeered true
                       bait true
                       bait
            
               dead true
               captainjones true
               warningdeath true
              ${luscacaptain} has the devil's own luck. As you meet his cutlass with your own, he twists out of the way and fires his pistol into your chest. The seconds slow as you realize this is going to be the way you die. Not killed in battle with the Lusca, but murdered by a petty, treasure-loving captain.
			  
              At least it has the feel of a pirate legend about it.
			  
              Your back hits the deck before you entirely realize you were falling, and though the pain in your chest is excruciating, you already feel as though it belongs to someone else, like you've already half-stepped across the gangplank into death. You gaze up at the blue sky, until ${luscacaptain}'s face blocks the view.
			  
              "No one comes between me and that treasure," he says, drawing his cutlass.
               blackguardenemy
                "Especially not a lowlife—" He stabs you in the shoulder. "—mutineering—" The thigh. "—sorry excuse for a landlubber—" The stomach, next to your already fatal stomach wound. "—the Lucayan has ever been ashamed to see as a pirate captain." He leans down, so your faces are almost touching, and though everything is already fuzzy around the edges, you have enough will left to wish you could move your arm and throttle him. Sadly, it doesn't respond. "I told you I'd see the end of you, ${surname}, and so I have."
               blackguardally
                "Even you, who I once thought of as my protégé," he says, and you think you see tears in his eyes. "May the devil take mercy on your soul, ${surname}. I'll make this quick."
               endif
              You see the flash of the blade in the clear Lucayan light, feel a sharp piercing sensation against your throat, and then, everything goes black.
              _scene 9zdeath
      I threaten ${luscacaptain} with force unless he returns the treasure.
         blackguarddead
          Captain Temerario looks at you askance, fingers on the hilt of his cutlass. "It comes to this, does it?" he asks.
		  
          You stare back, your hand lightly on your pistol. The question is whether he believes you can draw and shoot before him.
           pistols > (65modifier)
             convincedme
          
             fightfightfight
        
           blackguardally
            Blackguard looks at you with madness in his eyes. "Ye'll fight me? Ye? For the treasure ye know I've been seeking me whole life?"
			
            You stare him down, your hand resting lightly on your pistol. The question is whether Blackguard believes you'll shoot him, despite the alliance you've had in the past.
			
             pistols > (65modifier)
              After another moment, he looks away.
               steeredmewrong
            
               fightfightfight
          
            Blackguard looks at you with madness in his eyes. "Oh, I've been waiting for this day!"
             fightfightfight
      I dump the treasure without ${luscacaptain} knowing.
         treasuredumped true
        This will be tricky and require some subterfuge, but you have a good team to help you out. You tell Captain ${luscacaptain} that if you see his charts, you may be able to help him make escape plans. He eyes you with skepticism, but leads you into his cabin, where Tinima launches into an esoteric discussion about curses and bound creatures. You and Caesar bend over the charts as though contemplating the best course, but really you're looking for the treasure. If it's as all-consuming as they say, you believe the captain will keep it in his quarters rather than the hold.
		
        It doesn't take long to notice the thing that's out of place. Atop the captain's bed is a coffin, covered in scrimshaw carvings that are aged but still beautiful, even at a distance. Stealing a coffin is going to require more distraction than Tinima's lesson about curses. She glances back at you, waiting for some kind of signal.
         cambiar > 65
          You chant under your breath and send a little shiver through the boards of the deck, creaking it beneath her feet.
        With a flick of your chin toward the coffin, you try to communicate the type of distraction you need. Her eyes widen, but not as much as they would have a year ago. She's learned some subtlety to go with the ridiculous amount of power she commands. And you feel that power only a moment later, when the ship shudders as though something large has bumped its underside.
		
        "All hands!" screams ${luscacaptain}. "We'll not let the creature have us!" The ship creaks again, and you hope it's really Tinima's power and not the Lusca beneath you.
		
        While not every captain's cabin is a great cabin—the kind spanned with windows along the stern of the ship—this one happens to be exactly that kind. You and Caesar leap into action, grabbing the coffin and sending it crashing through the windows. You have only a moment to appreciate the art in the scrimshaw, telling the story of Ishmael's mutiny against his whale-hunting captain, before it sinks beneath the waves.
		
        You don't hesitate to leave after that, and it's just as well; ${luscacaptain} is giving the orders to move free of your ship, and you, Caesar, and Tinima only barely make it back aboard ${flagship} before ${luscacaptain} heads downwind, trying to get free of the "creature" beneath it. Tinima grins innocently.
		
        There's still the matter of the battling ships to decide.
         luscahero true
         fame 15
        *achieve luscahero
         cannonfodder
  Set course for the battling ships.
    If the Crown and the Pirate King could work together for only a moment, they might be able to defeat the sea monster. As you sail to intercept them, the Lusca bites down on the prow of the Pirate King's ship, which teeters ominously; the creature's tentacles curl around the Crown vessel and tighten with a sickening scream of timbers. 
	
    But despite the shared enemy, the two ships are as preoccupied with hitting each other as they are with taking down the monster. When it disengages, resuming its course toward ${luscacaptain}—and toward you—they continue with their battle. It's a good thing that your ship sails in the Lusca's path.
	
     theendisnigh
  Head for the Lusca.
     dinghy
      You're not worried about any ship on the water: your target is the creature itself.
       nantucketsleighride
      You ready your harpoons. Your crew rows steadily toward the monster.
	  
      The Lusca is the nightmare that the other sailors described. It has the tentacles and body of an octopus larger than any creature you've ever seen; it's easily of size with the pair of ships fighting around it. Then the organ sac tilts back into the water, and the maw of its shark's teeth, where a normal octopus's beak would be, clamps down on a sailor that has fallen into the water.
	  
      "Stay behind its beak!" you shout, and your crew are eager to obey. You creep closer and closer, the Lusca's attention still on the ships. The water is churning with blood, cannon fire, and the Lusca's arms, but you hold your course. As you close, what is your plan?
      
        I strike it with the harpoon.
           fame 50
          This is now about human versus monster, and you are going to strike on behalf of all the sailors of the Lucayan. Your crew readies the harpoon line and you rear back, aiming for a fleshy part to drive into. You see your opening and you throw your full weight behind the harpoon, plunging it into the Lusca.

           eticketride
           luscadead true
           luscahero true
          *achieve luscahero
          The Lusca screams in pain and outrage, and is surprised enough—and confused that such small creatures could threaten it—that it begins to flee, abandoning its attack on the two ships in favor of chasing after ${luscacaptain}. But it hasn't counted on your dinghy coming along for the ride. You and your crew hang onto the line, forcing the Lusca to stay at the surface as it drags you along.
		  
          If it were smart enough to think, it would turn on your small boat and crush you all. But, like the whales that flee from the whalers rather than smashing their tails into the whaling boats, it gives no thought to attack. It only wants to escape, and you're not going to let that happen.
		  
          Hours pass. They are hours in which you hang onto the harpoon rope for dear life. Hours in which the Lusca closes on ${luscacaptain}'s ship. Hours in which it almost imperceptibly begins to slow, until finally your wake is no higher than the whitecaps around you. The Lusca is dead.
		  
          From the distance, you hear cheers erupt, and Captain ${luscacaptain} changes course to come and pick up your dinghy after that harrowing ride.
           itsyourfault
        I have Caesar deliver the harpoon blow.
           fame 40
          This is your mad plan, but it takes a strong arm to deliver a blow like this, and there's no one you trust to make the hit more than Caesar. Your crew readies the harpoon line and you take your place immediately behind Caesar, holding tight as he rears back. He throws his full weight behind the harpoon and plunges it into the Lusca.
		  
           eticketride
         (holdcreature) I have Tinima confuse it with cambiar as I strike.
           fame 40
          You nod at Tinima, and she closes her eyes, despite the choppy waves around you. You wait until the Lusca slows, showing its confusion as Tinima tries to affect its mind. Its eye comes to the surface, just ahead of you, giving you the perfect target. You lunge forward with the harpoon, throwing your full weight into the weapon as it plunges into the Lusca.
		  
           eticketride         
         (mermaidarmy) I have the mermaids attack as I strike.
           fame 40
          You send your thoughts out to the mermaids as you did aboard your flagship, and almost as quickly as you can imagine them, they appear. You suppose they have been tracking the Lusca more effectively underwater than you could through the storm, and now they are showing their willingness to remove the threat to their waters in spades. They harry the creature, distracting it and drawing its attention away from the ships as your dinghy moves into position. You come alongside the distracted beast, and when the right moment comes, you lunge forward with the harpoon, throwing your full weight into the weapons as it plunges into the Lusca.

           eticketride
    
      You set a course to between the Lusca and ${luscacaptain}, ready to intercept the creature when it tries to reach its treasure. Tinima's winds fill your sails, and you make good time, changing your heading to face the Lusca down.
       theendisnigh
  Forget the Lusca and row for the [i]Bonney Lass[/i].
     bonneylass
    You adjust your course toward the listing [i]Bonney Lass[/i].
     luscadead
      In the time since you first spotted her, it looks as though the crew has been able to set her a bit to rights, though the crushed timbers where the Lusca squeezed the hull will take time in dry dock to replace. Anne limps across the deck, her arm in a blood-stained sling, but she's shouting orders as though she's in her finest health, and no one—not even the ship's doctor, who's trailing her at a distance while she ignores his existence—is going to persuade her otherwise.
	  
      You bring ${flagship} alongside, and
       lover  "Anne Read"
        after the initial relief in her expression at seeing you whole and healthy,
      she turns her hollering to you.
	  
      "Set course for San Alfonso!" she yells.
	  
      "But…" you start, but it's no good. Once she gets going, you won't be able to stop her.
	  
      "We won't make it in time, not with the damage to the hull, and you have to get there before the navy destroys it!"
	  
      "Wait," says Tinima. "What?"
	  
      Anne gestures with her good arm toward the two ships still firing at each other, despite how quickly they appear to be sinking. "That's El Sabio's ship [i]Aguila[/i] flying the Pirate King's colors. I still don't believe the old man is the Pirate King, but to the Crown that's as good as a signed document. It's what they've been waiting for to take over San Alfonso: the Pirate King's identity. They'll kill El Sabio and burn the port to the ground."
	  
      "But how will the Crown know?" The sinking ship is hardly going to get word back to the navy.
	  
      "There was a sister ship that sailed back as soon as the [i]Aguila[/i] raised her colors." She grimaces, and you're not sure if it's from the pain from her injuries or because you're still talking. "Set the course already! If San Alfonso burns, what am I going to be king of?"
	  
       getback
    
      She's listing hard to port, and you can see, even at this distance, where the Lusca's tentacles grabbed it and squeezed. Anne Read is lucky that the Lusca didn't take a bite out of her ship.
	  
      But as you approach, you see flags along the deck. You raise your spyglass and there's Anne, leaning heavily on the rail, but waving signal flags nonetheless. The message is clear—she wants you to kill the Lusca.
	  
      "If we were in shouting distance, I think she'd be yelling at you," Caesar rumbles beside you.
	  
      "I think she's mad about her boat," you reply.
	  
      Tinima grins, looking as friendly as a squall. "Let's go avenge her then."
	  
      You call out the orders and adjust your heading—straight into the Lusca's path.
      
       theendisnigh


 itsyourfault

Aboard ${luscacaptain}'s ship after it's all over, you consider what you'll do about the crew that created all this trouble.
 comandeered
  Of course, the captain responsible has met his fate. Now that the ship is yours, if the Crown—or the Pirate King—comes after it, you'll be the one who has to answer. It might be easiest to explain things upfront, or at least get another bit of good will under your belt. And you've got the opportunity to do just that.
   spyglass
if bounty
  If you were sure that the Crown vessel on the water could take him in, you'd turn over ${luscacaptain} in a heartbeat. But you suspect it's not in any position to do that at the moment, and in the meantime, Captain ${luscacaptain} and his crew are treating you as their savior, willing to do anything to help.
   spyglass

  But ultimately, it's up to the Pirate King—or the Crown—to determine that type of justice ${luscacaptain} will meet. Since ${luscacaptain} is headed back to San Alfonso, you're sure the Pirate King will catch up to him sooner or later. In the meantime, Captain ${luscacaptain} and his crew are treating you as their savior, willing to do anything to help.
   spyglass

 spyglass
You can see through ${luscacaptain}'s spyglass that the other ships on the water are in trouble. The [i]Bonney Lass[/i] is limping along and will make it back to shore without aid, but both the Crown ship and the Pirate King's ship are in enough distress that they won't survive without help.
 dinghy
  
    Tell ${luscacaptain} to aid the Crown ship.
      For now, you're as good as in command; you treat the ship like your own, and ${luscacaptain} defers to you—even when it means aiding a Crown vessel.
       privateering
    Tell ${luscacaptain} to aid the Pirate King's ship.
      "Aye aye," says ${luscacaptain}, effectively putting you in command of the ship for now, especially since you're aiding the ship that would boost any pirate's reputation.
       godsavetheking
    Head back for San Alfonso.
       noneofmybusiness

  
    Go back to my ship and aid the Crown vessel.
       privateering
    Return to my ship and aid the Pirate King's vessel.
       godsavetheking
     ((patron) or (patronlie)) Aid the Crown ship and send ${luscacaptain} to help the Pirate King's ship.
      You'll play both sides as long as you can. ${luscacaptain} is happy enough to aid the Pirate King's ship, since doing so would boost any pirate's reputation. You set a course for the Crown ship.
       privateering
    Head back for San Alfonso.
       noneofmybusiness
      You don't particularly care what happens to either of those ships. Your work here is done.
	  
      "It's a shame that the Lusca didn't sink that other Crown ship," ${luscacaptain} says. "Poor old El Sabio."
	  
      "What makes you say that?" you ask.
	  
      "The flag flying the Pirate King's colors?" begins ${luscacaptain}. You nod for him to go on. "It's on the rolls as El Sabio's. He's the owner. Had a merchant flag up right 'til battle was engaged."
	  
      "El Sabio is the Pirate King," Tinima says breathlessly.
	  
      "Or as good as, in the Crown's eyes," ${luscacaptain} says with a shrug. "And since that Crown ship managed to break off from the battle, there's no doubt the Crown has everything it needs now to bring a fist down on San Alfonso."
	  
      "Oh no," Tinima says, and Caesar mutters a curse under his breath.
	  
       getback
      You have to get back to San Alfonso now if you're going to beat the Crown Navy's full force there. Given Joaquin's presence in the port, you're certain they know the location, and now that they have what they were looking for from their spies, the Crown is sure to come down on the island like a hurricane. Life in San Alfonso is about to change forever.
       famecheck

 famecheck

 bait
   wealth 1000
 split
   wealth 333
 fame > 50
   moniker  "${surname}"
    Despite the urgency you feel in getting back toward port, you notice a change in your crew—a note of respect
     ruthless > 65
      or fear
    that wasn't there before. It's as though you've crossed a threshold from lowly captain to burgeoning legend. What have they started to call you?
    
      Ironeye ${firstname}.
         moniker "Ironeye ${firstname}"
         finished
        With a name like that, you're well on your way to fame and infamy.
         Chapter 8: The Pirate King
       (male) ${firstname} Diabolico.
         moniker "{firstname} Diabolico"
         finished
       (male=false) ${firstname} Diabolica.
         moniker "{firstname} Diabolica"
         finished
      Honorable ${firstname}.
         moniker "Honorable ${firstname}"
         finished
       (male) ${firstname} Benévolo.
         moniker "${firstname} Benévolo"
         finished
       (male=false) ${firstname} Benévola.
         moniker "${firstname} Benévola"
         finished
       (wrist) Hook.
         fame 10
         moniker "Hook"
         finished
       (ahab) ${surname} the Mad.
         fame 20
         moniker "${surname} the Mad"
         finished
       not(choice_randomtest) 
        They don't call me any of those things.
          What do they call you?
          *input_text moniker
           finished
  
     Chapter 8: The Pirate King

*temp panic false
*temp evacuation false
*temp sabotage false
*temp defenses false
*temp strategy "none"
*temp loaded true
*temp empowered false
*temp piratekingdead false
*temp piratementor false
*temp leoncaptain "El Sabio"
*temp north false
*temp fleetmember false
*temp joaquin1 true
*temp myfavoritesubject false
*hide_reuse

*image chap8.png center Chapter Eight: The Pirate King

You reach the harbor of San Alfonso before the news. It's only a matter of time before the Crown ships arrive…and your crew knows it.

  Order my crew to stay aboard ship.
    Widespread panic is the last thing San Alfonso needs. You have to keep this news contained or the city will descend into chaos. You have things to get done and people to see before that.
     crew < 50
      The crew doesn't look happy about this decision, though. You take the yawl into port, and they wait, but you have the feeling that as soon as you're out of sight, they may mutiny by abandoning ship. If there were more time to rein them in…but time is the one thing you don't have.
       panic true
     whatstheplan
  Let the crew disembark, come what may.
     panic true
    It's possible the crew won't spread the news of the Crown's imminent arrival. It's unlikely, but it's possible. And if they do spread the news and start widespread panic, well, San Alfonso has a reputation for handling its own. It'll all shake down all right, you imagine.
     whatstheplan
  Send the ship around to the north side of the island to wait.
     north true
    Best to keep the crew out of all of this—and keep your own escape route clear if you need it. The north side of the island has a rocky coast and, because it's a bit treacherous, tends to be avoided by most captains. You suspect that will leave it off the Crown's charts for now and give you a safe getaway if needed.
     whatstheplan
  Have Caesar organize an evacuation effort.
     evacuation true
    Of all your crew, Caesar has the coolest head. He's also the one you turn to when you need to make order out of chaos. He may not see himself as a leader, but he's well trusted and well respected in San Alfonso. People will listen to him. And regardless of your feelings about the Crown and the Pirate King, you'd rather see the people of San Alfonso, particularly the citizens who live there, avoid the slaughter you're sure the Crown will bring.
     whatstheplan
  
	
 whatstheplan

What is it that you're hoping to accomplish before the Crown arrives?
 planchoice

   (privateer > 60) Convince Carolina de la Playa of a threat inland to divert her attention.
    If de la Playa isn't watching the port waters, the Crown will have that much easier a time taking over the island.
	
    You reach the office of the Capitán de Puerto and hurry inside, doing your best to look as though you're trying to outrun bad news. You make a show of it, being sure to get the attention of everyone in the room. The two office clerks and the sailors all watch as you half-stumble to de la Playa's desk. The clerks protest, but when de la Playa looks up, she gives no indication she's surprised, or irritated, that you've skipped the usual procedure.
	
    "Captain ${surname}," she says tersely.
     debt > 0
      "Your payment is late as usual."
	  
      It isn't, actually. You paid on time. But that's her usual greeting.

      "This is more important," you say.
     endif
	
    "I have news."
	
    She laces her fingers in front of her, waiting for you to go on.
	
    "Ortega," you start, naming a local troublemaker, "just marched out of the Lobo Negro with enough black powder to blow a hole in the side of a mountain, claiming he was going to destroy the spirits of the rainforest once and for all."
	
     parley > 60
       sabotage true
      She sighs, pinching the bridge of her nose. "Drunk?" she asks. You nod. Her eyes flick to the window. "A bit early in the day for that."
	  
      When the Capitán de Puerto stands, the rest of the room waits at attention. "We'd best be after him, then. There's no telling what kind of damage he could cause with that much black powder." She nods her thanks to you, and the clerks usher out the sailors, telling them to come back later. When you leave the office, they hang a sign on the door—[i]cerrado[/i], closed—and head after the harbormaster to aid her in keeping the city safe from local lunatics.
	  
      But not from the Crown Navy.
	  
      Of course, the port is just half of the equation. What will you do about the Pirate King?
       planchoice
    
      You were hoping for action, but she just rolls her eyes. "If I jumped up every time Ortega said something stupid, I'd never sit down." 
	  
      The rest of the room relaxes, and the clerks go about their business with the waiting sailors. You decide to retreat after the wasted effort, but de la Playa is still looking at you, considering. "It's unlike you to go out of your way to help this office, ${surname}."
	  
      You shake your head. "I'm just looking out for the good of San Alfonso, Capitán."
	  
      "Hmmm," she says, then looks back down at her desk. You make for the door, but as you exit, you can see her watching you again, and you wonder if you've just done the exact opposite of what you intended.

      But the port is just half of the equation. What will you do about the Pirate King?
       planchoice    
   (privateer < 40) Warn Carolina de la Playa of the incoming ships.
    The more de la Playa knows in advance, the better she can bolster San Alfonso's defenses. You can't imagine it will be enough, given how hard the Crown is likely to come down on San Alfonso if they're confident they can capture the Pirate King, but any defense is better than no defense at all.
	
    You reach the office of the Capitán de Puerto and hurry inside. Carolina de la Playa is at her desk while two clerks run interference with sailors looking for assistance or loans or purchases. You ignore the clerks and the other sailors and march straight to de la Playa's desk. The clerks protest, but when de la Playa looks up, she gives no indication she's surprised, or irritated, that you've skipped the usual procedure.
	
    "Captain ${surname}," she says tersely.
     debt > 0
      "Your payment is late as usual."
	  
      It isn't, actually. You paid on time. But that's her usual greeting.

      "This is more important," you say.
     endif
	
    "I have news."
	
    She laces her fingers in front of her, waiting for you to go on.
	
    "The Crown Navy is preparing to attack San Alfonso," you say, aware of how the room goes quiet behind you. As you explain what you know, de la Playa's usually placid face hardens, and you see an edge of violence behind the expression. She stands, and gone is the unflappable dockmaster; in her place is a pirate captain whose clipped orders are ignored at a crew's peril. Her clerks, and the sailors in her office, seem to recognize this.
	
     evacuation
      "I already have Caesar organizing an evacuation," you tell her.
	  
      She nods.
    "All who can't, or aren't willing to, fight should head inland or ship out," she says. "In the meantime, we'll man the cannons and send out a perimeter fleet. If we can't stop them, we'll go to Davy Jones trying."
	  
    You leave her office no less concerned about San Alfonso's fate than before.

    But the port is just half of the equation. What will you do about the Pirate King?
     evacuation true
     defenses true
     planchoice
  Warn El Sabio about the incoming Crown Navy.
     strategy "warn"
     ((privateer > 50) or (patron))
      Why the sudden change of heart about the Crown?
      
        I'm making a decent living as a pirate. I don't want that to change.
           greed 50
           privateer -50
          It's in your best interest not to change the status quo. If the Crown claims San Alfonso, the market for both pirates and pirate hunters will shrink. You'd hate to be out of a job. No, things need to stay as they are if you're to keep getting ahead.
		  
           patron
            Besides, the Crown doesn't need to know that the warning came from you. You can keep playing both sides as long as both sides exist.
           hacienda
        The price of citizenship should not be the sacrifice of the people of San Alfonso.
           greed -50
          You'd love for San Alfonso to come under the Crown's custodianship, but if those ships arrive in the harbor, they'll unleash a broadside at the port that won't distinguish between pirates and the people of the city. Sure, many of them are retired criminals, but there are bakers and coopers and cartographers and children—all manner of people who aren't criminals according to the Crown's justice.
		  
          You have to stop the slaughter.
           patron
            You'll find a way to bring San Alfonso into the fold for the Crown, but in a way that doesn't sacrifice the city itself.
           hacienda
        Caesar and Tinima have convinced me of the Crown's tyranny.
           privateer -75
           caesar 50
           tinima 50
           patron false
           patronlie true
          Your first mate and your cambiante have long questioned your positive feelings about the Crown, and you find that they've worn you down. Maybe it's Tinima's valid concerns about how the Crown has treated her people every time she creates a new settlement. Maybe it's Caesar's belief that the people are better off ruling themselves than being ruled by a greedy monarch across the sea. You haven't taken the time yet to think through this new feeling in your gut, but now that San Alfonso is being threatened, you find that your loyalty to your crew is stronger than your desire to be a respectable citizen.
		  
          And that means it's your duty to warn the Pirate King—if that truly is El Sabio's real identity.
           hacienda
    
       privateer -75
      Whether or not El Sabio really is the Pirate King, he's the one in the best position to keep the Crown Navy out of San Alfonso. No one on the island commands the same respect, and if anyone is going to be able to convince the pirates of San Alfonso to join together and fight the Crown, it's him.
       hacienda
  Capture El Sabio for the Crown.
     strategy "crown"
     ((privateer < 51) or (patronlie))
      Why the sudden change of heart about the Crown?
      
        The Pirate King's as good as caught; I might as well benefit from his retirement.
           greed 50
           privateer 50
          It's not so much that you love the Crown as that you see an opportunity here. If you're the one to bring them the Pirate King, you'll not only be rewarded a tremendous bounty, but you'll also be eliminating one of the biggest competitors to fame in the Lucayan.
		  
          You might have to become a pirate hunter exclusively after this, given that most of the pirates on the Lucayan will be after your head if they find out you betrayed El Sabio, but there are plenty of career opportunities for pirate hunters these days. Especially with the Crown in control of San Alfonso.
           hacienda
        I'll sacrifice the Pirate King to save San Alfonso.
           privateer 25
           greed -50
          If you deliver El Sabio to the Crown before the navy reaches San Alfonso, you'll be able to keep them from destroying the city. You hope.
		  
          Given how badly the Pirate King has been failing to protect his people lately—first the ghost ship, then the Lusca—they'll be able to get on without him just fine. You're sure someone else will rise up to take his place. Anne Read will probably give you as much in a bounty reward as the Crown.
           hacienda
        It's what Joaquin would want me to do.
           privateer 75
           joaquin 50
           patronlie false
           patron true
          You have no idea where the spy is now, but if you could confer with him, you know he'd want you to take this opportunity to raise yourself in the eyes of the Crown and help make the Lucayan a safer place for respectable citizens in the Crown's settlements. You're not sure at what point his arguments convinced you—you're honestly a little surprised to find that your conscience has been swayed—but your gut is telling you it's your duty to serve the Crown.
		  
          And that means it's your duty to capture the Pirate King.
           hacienda
    
      This is the opportunity you've been waiting for through your entire piratical career. If you can capture the Pirate King, you're sure to be granted a letter of marque. You'll be able to become a Crown citizen, cleared of all charges against you, and take up whatever life you want. The bounty will guarantee that you'll have enough money to start your new life, however you decide to start it. All you have to do is get El Sabio to the Crown Navy before the navy arrives to capture him itself.
       hacienda
  Challenge El Sabio for the title of Pirate King.
     strategy "challenge"
    And why not? What has the Pirate King done for San Alfonso lately? He didn't defeat the ghost ship.
     ghosthero
      That was you.
    He didn't defeat the Lusca.
     luscahero
      That was you.
    Even if you gave him warning, who's to say he wouldn't just sail off and leave San Alfonso to its fate? No, you have no confidence in the Pirate King.
	
    You'd make a better one.
     anneequal
      And if Anne were here, you'd fight him side by side. With Anne wounded, the task falls to you alone.
    You're certain you can defeat him and save San Alfonso yourself.
     hacienda
	
 hacienda

You haven't been to El Sabio's hacienda since the matter of Evan Lark, but things are much the same: there are workers in the sugarcane, their wages supplemented, you now suspect, with pirate gold. Behind the plantation house is the cliff overlooking the Lucayan, and you wonder how much of its placement was designed to keep an eye out for incoming attack, rather than just to give a pretty view.

  I charge straight in.
     elsabio -15
    A servant—the butler?—tries to stop you at the front door, but you make your way inside without being led. The servant locks step with you, at first saying that El Sabio isn't in. You shoot him a withering look that immediately has him changing his story. El Sabio isn't [i]available[/i], he corrects himself. You show yourself to the parlor, since you remember well enough where it is, and you loom over one of the statuettes on display.

    It doesn't take long for the servant to realize you're unmoved by his pleas. He leaves, though you're sure there are others watching you, and you wait, muscles tense, ready for whatever happens next.
     fake
  I knock and wait to be admitted.
     elsabio 15
    A servant—the butler?—greets you at the front door.
	
    "Hello," you say in your best polite tone. "I'm Captain ${surname} of ${flagship}. I need to speak to El Sabio urgently."
	
    "I'm afraid El Sabio is unavail—"
	
    "Urgently," you interrupt, flashing what you hope is a charmingly roguish grin.
	
     parlor
    The servant sighs but ushers you into the parlor. You stand, waiting and watching as the servant shuts the door, next to one of the statuettes that Tinima admired when last you were here.
     fake
    *fake_choice
      I'll give him to the count of three hundred, and then I'm going looking for him.
      I wait patiently. The Crown still needs time to arrive.
      I check my pistol to make sure it's ready.
     elsabioarrives
  I shoot my gun in the air and see who comes out to greet me.
     elsabio -25
    Almost immediately, a servant dashes out into the yard to see what lunatic has come onto the plantation grounds.
	
    "I need to see El Sabio," you say before he can question you.
	
    "I'm afraid El Sabio is unavail—"
	
    You draw your second pistol, which is still loaded. "Now, savvy?"
	
     parlor
	
 elsabioarrives
You don't have to wait long. The parlor doors open, and El Sabio flows in, as though the force of his personality opened the doors ahead of him. There is an aura about him—one you've noticed before—of not just power, but charisma. This is a man people want to follow. But even as you notice this, you see the tired bruises beneath his eyes, the silver sheen through his hair. He carries a cane, and you think he's leaning on it, a tool rather than an affectation. He pauses at the edge of the rush rug that covers the floor and gestures for you to sit.

 strategy  "warn"
   elsabio 15
  "The Crown is coming for you," you say without preamble.
  
  El Sabio smiles, but his wide face doesn't brighten, and his wrinkles seem no less tired. "They will leave San Alfonso alone until they believe they know the identity of the Pirate King," says El Sabio, like that belief is a shield between him and the Crown.
  
  "That's what I mean," you say. "They're coming for [i]you[/i]. They think you're the Pirate King."
  
  The smile vanishes, but the look that follows is pure steel. "They do now, do they?"
   ((elsabio < 50) or (patronlie))
    He strides closer to you. "And would you have anything to do with that?"
   endif
  
  "One of your ships raised the flag of the Pirate King in a battle with the Lusca," you explain. "The Crown rubbed two guineas together and made a doubloon. It doesn't matter how they got the information. They think they have enough evidence to justify destroying San Alfonso, and they'll do it."
  
  His fingers tighten on the ball of the cane. "Yes. They will." He looks up at you. "Follow me. There is still hope."
  *fake_choice
    I trust him.
    This better not be a trap.
    I have my pistol ready if things get stormy.
   thecave

if strategy  "crown"
  
    Shoot first, ask questions later.
       shootingtime
       elsabio -30
       loaded false
       myfavoritesubject true
      As your pistol comes up, El Sabio moves, preternaturally fast. You fire, trying to track his motion, and you think you might hit—but the air seems to curve and the bullet goes past as El Sabio draws the sword out of his cane, its tip at your throat before you can even reach for your cutlass. He barks a single word in Maipure, and the rushes of the rug below you snake up around your legs, holding you more tightly than you would have anticipated.
	  
      "I do not like to be shot at in my own home," he says, his voice like gravel, and the snake reeds tighten.
	  
      "Or on your own ship, Pirate King?" you ask, affecting nonchalance.
	  
      Given that you just shot at him, he's unsurprised by your accusation.
       fame > 65
        "I might have known it would be you who came for me," he growls, but you think there's an edge of amusement in his tone.
      "Who else have you told?"
	  
      "I've told no one," you say honestly. "One of your merchant ships raised the Pirate King's flag fighting the Lusca. The Crown is coming for you, and for San Alfonso. I just thought I'd get here first."
	  
      He sheathes the sword cane, and with a subtle gesture of his hand, the rushes release your legs. "I find I don't have the stomach for killing you outright, like I would have at your age," he says. "But I can't leave you here, and I don't have time to handle you properly. You'll come with me for now." He gestures out the parlor door, waiting for you to lead.
      
        I don't like it, but I don't have another loaded pistol.
          You do, of course, have more shot and black powder on you. What self-respecting pirate wouldn't? And next time, he won't have the advantage of surprise.
           thecave
        Frankly, things have just gotten interesting. I'll go.
          Clearly, you underestimated the old man. Now you've seen some of what created the legend of the Pirate King: fast reflexes, elegant cambiar, and former ruthlessness. You won't underestimate him a second time.
           thecave
        "Where are we going?"
           elsabio 10
          He pokes you in the leg with the cane, and despite your shooting at him, he seems amused by the question. "You're going to see a few more secrets of the Pirate King," he says.
           thecave
    "El Sabio, on behalf of the Crown, you're under arrest."
       elsabio -25
      The bureaucrat spreads his arms, the ball of his cane dangling from his right hand. "On what charges? That I do not pay my taxes?"
	  
      You return his smile. "I'm sure the Crown would appreciate their percentage of your earnings," you say. "But the more pressing concern is that you are the Pirate King. Turn yourself in now, and San Alfonso might escape their cannons."
	  
      His hand tightens on the cane. "Who have you told?"
	  
      "I've told no one," you say honestly. "One of your merchant ships raised the Pirate King's flag fighting the Lusca. The Crown is coming for you, and for San Alfonso. I just thought I'd get here first."
	  
      "And they will destroy San Alfonso on that evidence, whether or not they know the truth," El Sabio says.
	  
       goodcolonialist
      "They will colonize San Alfonso," you correct. "Save the city and come with me."
	  
      "Not yet," he says. A sword flashes out of the cane, faster than you'd have thought the old man could move. "I can't leave a Crown agent in my parlor, but I find I'm disinclined to kill you outright. You'll come with me until I can handle you properly."
      
        "I find I'm disinclined to bloody your parlor. Lead on."
           elsabio 15
          He laughs, and you can imagine him inviting a captain of the Crown Navy aboard for dinner while helping himself to the Crown's gold, all the while exchanging witty barbs with his adversary. It's charming, in the way of the romances, and you can't decide whether you appreciate it or find it irksome.
		  
          He gestures out the parlor door with his sword, and you lead as he falls into step behind you, directing you through his home and down.
           thecave
        I shoot him here.
           elsabio -30
           loaded false
           myfavoritesubject true
          As your pistol comes up, El Sabio moves, preternaturally fast. You fire, trying to track his motion, and you think you might hit—but the air seems to curve and the bullet goes past as El Sabio raises the tip of his sword to your throat before you can even reach for your cutlass. He barks a single word in Maipure, and the rushes of the rug below you snake up around your legs, holding you more tightly than you would have anticipated.
	  
          "I do not like to be shot at in my own home," he says, his voice like gravel, and the snake reeds tighten.
		  
          "I'm trying to keep your island from being shot," you say, still trying to appeal to his better nature.
		  
          With a gesture, he releases you from the reeds. He shoves you toward the parlor door, keeping his sword at your back. "I'll give you directions. Lead the way."
           thecave
        "Where are we going?"
           elsabio 10
          He taps the back of your leg with his sword, and despite your being a Crown loyalist, he seems amused by the question. "You're going to see a few more secrets of the Pirate King," he says.
           thecave
    "How long did you think you could stay Pirate King, old man?"
       denialisariver
      El Sabio widens his arms innocently. "I suspect the Pirate King might have something to say about that. Me? I'm just an old bureaucrat, running my hacienda and tending my town."

      "The Crown believes differently," you say.
	  
      He looks intrigued rather than worried. "And why do you think that?"
	  
      "Because one of your merchant ships raised the Pirate King's flag fighting the Lusca. The Crown is coming for you, and for San Alfonso. I just thought I'd get here first."
	  
      The glimmer of joviality in El Sabio's demeanor vanishes. "And they will destroy San Alfonso on that evidence, whether or not they know the truth," El Sabio says.

       strategy  "crown"
         goodcolonialist
      
        "And tell me, El Sabio, what will the Pirate King do to protect San Alfonso? Will he actually act? Or will he wait until some younger captain throws ${pronounhim}self in danger's way and rescues the city without his help?"
		
        El Sabio looks at you sharply. "You want action?" he says. "I will show you what the Pirate King will do."
         thecave

  
    Shoot first. He'll be easier to beat if he's already down.
       shootingtime
    "I challenge you for the title of Pirate King."
       denialisariver
    "How long did you think you could stay Pirate King, old man?"
       denialisariver
 thecave

El Sabio takes you through what you would have thought to be the storage cellar for wines and spices, but behind a wine rack is another set of stairs, these steeper—and older—than the ones in the hacienda above. The walls are rough-hewn rock, damp from the island's humidity and the proximity to the sea. You hear the sound of waves below you and suspect you're heading down the inside of the cliff abutting the hacienda.

You're proven correct when you make the next turn. The stairs open out into a cave large enough to house a galleon—and there, in all her glory, is [i]León de Lucayan[/i], the flagship of the Pirate King. She's a stately galleon,
 flagship  "the [i]Sea Queen[/i]"
  though not as regal as the [i]Sea Queen[/i], in your considered opinion,
and she looks every ounce a pirate's pride. As you descend, you see the cave is larger still; there's the [i]Galicia[/i], a small cutter well known for being the Pirate King's favorite blockade runner.

"This and the one you already found on the north side of the island aren't the only hidden harbors the Pirate King knows," El Sabio tells you.

"You know about that?" you ask.

"I know about a lot," El Sabio answers.
 piratekingthief
  "I've put it on your tab."
He gestures ahead. "Onto the [i]León[/i], ${surname}."
 myfavoritesubject
  You hesitate, and El Sabio gestures again, but this time with his sword cane's tip in the center of your spine. You walk up the gangplank and onto the Pirate King's flagship.
 endif

She's nearly as impressive on deck as she is from afar. The Pirate King's crimson sails have long struck fear in the hearts of even the admirals of the Crown Navy. You see the way the deep red of the sheets, even tightly furled, would draw the eye in the sunlight. After he boards, El Sabio walks across deck straight to the ship's compass, his cane over his shoulder like a club, and he seems to have momentarily left you to your own devices.

  I follow him.
     compass
    At the helm, you see El Sabio muttering under his breath in Maipure, and the compass—a design you've never before seen—begins to glow. You've heard of artifacts that react to cambiar, but they're the stuff of legends. You didn't think you'd actually ever see one; to be honest, you weren't sure they existed.
	
    The dome over the compass changes from the cardinal directions to what looks like a night sky, except that none of the constellations are familiar, and the stars are in different colors. A few are red, more are gold, and still more are a greenish blue. All three combined are outnumbered by the white stars. All of them move around great black spaces in the sky.
     sail > 65
      Except, of course, it isn't a sky at all. You're looking at a living, moving map of the Lucayan.
     endif
	
    As El Sabio chants, the red lights change direction, all heading toward one of the black spaces to the south. A line of gold lights sails in same direction. When El Sabio's chanting stops, the movement continues.
	
    "The Pirate King's fleet is on the move," he says, gesturing to the red lights. His fingers rest on the black space, and he scowls at the gold line. "Whether or not they'll reach San Alfonso before the Crown Navy, I don't know."
	
    "That explains why no one can ever find your fleet in one place," you say.
	
     appraisal
    El Sabio looks you over. "I told you once I would watch your career with interest," he says. "Well, I have. 
     elsabio > 60
      And I have been impressed with you. I intended to recruit you sooner, rather than later, though this is even sooner than I had planned."
       jointheclub
      He pulls the ball on his cane away from the base, and the blade of the sword within shimmers in the half-light of the cave. You have the sudden sense that the air is holding its breath, and you can almost hear the hum of cambiar.
	  
      "I am bound by blood to the Lucayan," he intones. "Her waters flow within my veins. I am her protector, and her spirits speak with me. The Crown sees her as water to be traversed, her islands as lands to be conquered. They do not know she is alive."
      
        I step closer, drawn to the building magic.
          You can feel the shifting of cambiar around El Sabio—the Pirate King—and you are pulled to it, breathing it in, feeling it thrum beneath your feet. It is older than the cambiar you've touched, and wider, and deeper. Tinima might be able to comprehend this, but it's bigger than you can hold in your head. Instead, it flows through you, permeating your skin, your thoughts. You let it flow.
		  
           swirling
        I step back and make a sign of warding.
          This feels like old magic, the kind that comes from the legends of times before the Crown came to these waters, when there were fewer people and more spirits roaming the islands. Even as you step back, it flows over you, like a warm breeze that breaks the calm before a hurricane.
		  
           swirling
        I wait and watch.
          A breeze ruffles El Sabio's short gray hair, though you don't feel it until a moment later. You see the vibrations in the deck beneath his feet before you feel them yourself. He is in the center of the storm, and as the energy spreads, it reaches out to you, caressing you with tendrils of energy that leave your skin tingling.
		  
           swirling
          "I am not the first Pirate King," he says, "though I have held the title longer than most. And longer than I've had any right to live." Despite the swirling magic, or perhaps because of it, you can see just how tired El Sabio is.
		  
           elsabio > 70
             strategy  "crown"
              "I am no longer strong enough to wield her full power," he continues. "You are not the heir I'd have chosen—there are others more familiar with the magic, with the fleet—but we will need all the Lucayan can give us to keep San Alfonso free the Crown. Will you take on this mantle and become the next Pirate King?"
               longlivetheking
              
                I accept the responsibility.
                   piratementor true
                   pirateking true
                  *achieve elrey
                  He makes a cut in his hand with his sword cane, and the blood drips to the deck. "Then allow your blood to join mine, and you will become the vessel."
				  
                  You nod, taking your cutlass and slicing across your palm. Your blood drips to the deck, and all at once the air is full of music: the sounds of the coquí frog, the cry of the howler monkey, the chatter of the vervet monkeys, the rocking of the waves against the beach, the melodies of reed flutes, the pounding of drums. They are the sounds of the islands in the Lucayan, and as they surround you, you feel the cave hold its breath and the ocean still. Then, swift as an exhale, power crashes into you, tropical breeze stealing your breath as it fills your lungs, the drums of the islands pounding in your heartbeat, the skitter of hermit crabs crawling over your skin.
								  
                  You can feel it like an extra limb. The Lucayan stretches out beyond you, her islands living and breathing and becoming, even in places where metal and stone dampen her energy. You know at once that those contained spots are where the Crown has paved the streets, has brought its coats and corsets and carriages.
				  
                  "I know what we need to do," you say.
                  
                    Use the [i]Galicia[/i] to lead the navy away.
                       galicia
                      "The [i]Galicia[/i] is fast enough that she can get behind the navy's lines. If I take her out past the navy's blockade, I can fire on them."
					  
                      "They might give chase," El Sabio says slowly.
					  
                      "And it could give the rest of the Pirate King's fleet enough time to make a showing."
					  
                      El Sabio nods. "Coming from places that aren't San Alfonso. Which would create enough doubt to leave San Alfonso safe." He looks at you gravely. "For today."
					  
                      You shake your head. "We will deal with tomorrow later. For now, I board the [i]Galicia[/i] and sail her as fast as she can go." He starts to interject, but you smile. "You need to be seen in San Alfonso, looking innocent and completely unpiratical."
					  
                      He grins in response. "So I do. I'll go put on some respectable clothing." He takes your arm in his. "Good luck, Captain ${surname}."
                       blockaderunner
                    Get back to my ship to distract the navy.
                       flagship
                      "I need a flag," you tell El Sabio. "If the [i]León[/i] has the flag of the Pirate King's flagship, I'll take it."
					  
                      El Sabio frowns. "What are you planning?"
					  
                      "To convince the Crown that I am the Pirate King," you explain. "I may be able to outmaneuver them, and I know the waters around San Alfonso better than they do. If I attack and lead them away, they'll have no reason to take San Alfonso."
					  
                      "Today," El Sabio says gravely.
					  
                      "I can only worry about one day at a time," you say. "And if I can give the Crown a black eye, so much the better."
					  
                      El Sabio mutters under his breath and raises one arm. A chest near the bulkhead flies open, and a black-and-gold flag slithers its way across the deck, drawn by El Sabio's cambiar. You watch as the skull and crossbones wriggle, the crown atop them shimmering in the dim cave light.
					  
                      "Good luck, Captain ${surname}," El Sabio says. You take the flag and begin putting your plan into action.
                       flagshipruse
                    Have the [i]León[/i] lead the pirates of San Alfonso in an attack.
                       lionofthesea
                      "It's time for decisive action," you say. "We have to make the Crown realize that the cost of taking San Alfonso is too great. The pirates of San Alfonso may be a raggedy lot, but they see the tides. If the Pirate King's flagship were to lead a fleet out of the harbor of San Alfonso, they'd follow. All of us united against the Crown's forces would make the Crown think twice about trying to take the island again."
					  
                      "For a time," El Sabio says cautiously.
					  
                      "I can only worry about one day at a time," you say. "And if I can give the Crown a black eye, so much the better." He starts to interject, but you smile. "You need to be seen in San Alfonso, looking innocent and completely unpiratical. Just in case."
					  
                      He grins in response. "So I do. I'll go put on some respectable clothing." He takes your arm in his. "Good luck, Captain ${surname}."
                       pirateking
                        
                        The [i]León[/i] handles like a dream, responding to you as though she were fully crewed. It's a heady feeling, and one you would enjoy more if you didn't have all of San Alfonso to save. You sail the [i]León[/i] back to the port—the first time the Pirate King's flagship has been seen there in years.
                         portdefense
                      
                        You feel the [i]León[/i] rumble beneath you, as though she's growling. El Sabio shrugs. "I'll have her take you back to port, but then you'll have to get your crew aboard. She's not as inclined to listen to me from a distance."
						
                        Ah. So that's part of what it means to be Pirate King. "I'll make it work, sir."
						
                        He walks down the gangplank. "I have faith that you will!"
                        
                        It's odd to stand at the helm of the [i]León[/i] knowing that not a thing you do will change her course. You tried to adjust one of the sails, but it whipped back into place with a speed that made you feel as if the ship were scolding you. After that, you just waited. As she arrives in port, you realize it's the first time the Pirate King's flagship has been seen there in years.
                         portdefense
                I'll join the fleet, but I don't want to be tied to that much magic!
                   fleetmember true
                  "No," you say. "I'm not the right person for the job."
				  
                  It's not a responsibility that you want. And that much magic gives you the willies.
				  
                  "Then what would you do?" El Sabio asks, his frustration clear.
                   alternatestrategy
                I don't want to be Pirate King, or in his fleet, but I'll be an ally today.
                  You're too independent for this nonsense, but you'll take the Pirate King's aid today nonetheless. "Keep your magic," you say. "And keep your fleet. I'm my own captain. But I will help you save San Alfonso."
                   surprisesurprise
                I'll join the fleet, but I don't think this is the best strategy.
                   fleetmember true
                   greed -50
                  "This isn't a decision to be rushed," you say. "I don't know how to use the power. You do. We can come up with a strategy that uses our strengths rather than relies on our ability to adapt to a new status quo."
                   surprisesurprise
				  
                  El Sabio looks surprised. "What would you do?"
                   alternatestrategy
                  
                    Use the [i]Galicia[/i] to lead the navy away.
                       galicia
                    Get back to my ship to distract the navy.
                       flagship
                    Have the [i]León[/i] lead the pirates of San Alfonso in an attack.
                       lionofthesea
                 ((strategy  "warn") and (loaded)) I shoot him.
                  Your story doesn't end by meekly accepting a mantle of power. What kind of a legend would that make? You have other plans. You shoot, knowing you've caught El Sabio in a moment of surprise, with so much of his energy wrapped up into the ritual.
				  
                   sneakattack
                  He may be surprised, but the [i]León[/i] isn't. The moment you shoot, you feel the deck rise up between you and El Sabio. Faster than you can follow with your naked eye, the wood shoots upward into a shield, catching the bullet before it can pass through the small distance between you and the Pirate King.
				  
                   bathingthelion
                  El Sabio's eyes gleam. "I offered you a chance. Now, battle is the only option."
				  
                  "Suits me," you say, drawing your sword. El Sabio draws the sword fully out of his cane, but rather than dropping the cane sheath, he keeps it in his other hand like a club. He moves as though he knows how to wield them.
				  
                  But then, so do you.
                  
                    I fight with weapons.
                      When it comes down to life or death, you trust your blade and brawn the most. You attack, pushing into the old man. He moves quickly, darting out of the blade's path rather than countering. And then he is behind you, striking out with the sword cane. You parry, driving into him with all the intensity you can muster. He blocks, but as he holds off your blade, you see that he's much weaker than you are. If you can just get him to hold still, you'll be able to overpower him. But with his speed, he may well tire you before you can end the fight.
					  
                       pistols > 70
                        He darts behind you again, looking for an opening. He thrusts at your hip, narrowly missing as you dodge away. You counter, slicing a line through his shirt at the shoulder, but failing to draw blood. You can't lunge when he's moving so fast—committing to a strong strike like that only opens up your defenses. You keep moving, trying to find an opening, parrying and slashing in an attempt to break through.
						
                        You're going to need more than just your fighting skills to win here.
                        
                          I use cambiar to rock the deck beneath his feet.
                            It's a basic trick of cambiar, but all you need is an opening.
                             cambiar > 60
                              You hiss the chant under your breath, and as El Sabio darts to one side, the deck bubbles under his foot. He trips, and that's all that you need. You lunge forward, sinking your cutlass into his chest.
                               elsabioshock
                              He looks up at you in shock, and as his blood seeps out onto the deck, the ship beneath him shudders.

                               deaththrows
                               piratekingdead true
                              "Your blood," he gasps, his chest quaking. "She must have your blood. Or the magic is gone."
                              
                                I slice my hand to take the power of the Pirate King.
                                   privateer -30
                                   powerclaim
                                   pirateking true
                                  *achieve elrey
                                   empowered true
                                  Your blood drips to the deck, and all at once, the air is full of music: the sounds of the coquí frog, the cry of the howler monkey, the chatter of the vervet monkeys, the rocking of the waves against the beach, the melodies of reed flutes, the pounding of drums. They are the sounds of the islands in the Lucayan, and as they surround you, you feel the cave hold its breath and the ocean still. Then, swift as an exhale, power crashes into you, tropical breeze stealing your breath as it fills your lungs, the drums of the islands pounding in your heartbeat, the skitter of hermit crabs crawling over your skin.
								  
                                  You can feel it like an extra limb. The Lucayan stretches out beyond you, her islands living and breathing and becoming, even in places where metal and stone dampen her energy. You know at once that those contained spots are where the Crown has paved the streets, has brought its coats and corsets and carriages.
                                  
                                    Bwahahaha! The power!
                                       greed 25
                                      It isn't as though you can use it—yet. It's going to take some time to learn to channel it.
                                       thebody
                                      But in the meantime, what do you do?
                                      
                                        *selectable_if (strategy  "crown") Take El Sabio's body to the Crown Navy.
                                          You have to keep San Alfonso safe from the Crown's cannons, and taking El Sabio's body to them is the fastest way to do it. You'll get a healthy bounty for it as well.
                                           piratekingbounty
                                        *selectable_if (strategy  "crown") Aid the Crown in conquering San Alfonso.
                                          San Alfonso will be better off as a proper civilized colony, and you know you can make that happen. You can give the Crown real insider information to help make the transition as smooth as possible for the Crown Navy.
										  
                                          Though it's probably best to drop off El Sabio's body as well. They'll be interested in it.
                                           piratekingbounty
                                        *selectable_if (strategy  "crown") Take ${flagship} and lead the Crown Navy away from San Alfonso.
                                          Now that you have the power of the Pirate King, you're confident you can confuse and distract the Crown Navy. You can feel the fleet tied to the Pirate King's cambiar, and you sense that you could give them vague direction from afar. Subterfuge seems the best solution.
                                           blockaderunner
                                        *selectable_if (strategy  "crown") Use the [i]León[/i] to unite the pirates against the Crown Navy.
                                          You understand how the Pirate King crewed the [i]León[/i] without any hands on deck: you can feel her responding to the cambiar of the Lucayan, and she'll obey you as a single master. If you raise the flag of the Pirate King to stand against the Crown, you know that the pirates of San Alfonso will join you.
                                           portdefense
                                        Let San Alfonso burn.
                                           ruthless 100
                                          Why should you save the city? Now that the Crown has a mind to destroy it, there's no way it will be spared. Better to get aboard ${flagship} and head away from San Alfonso.
										  
                                          You can build your own, better base of operations.
                                           escape
                                     (strategy  "crown") I can channel that energy for the good of the Crown's colonies.
                                       privateer 25
                                      The contained spots are centers of hidden power; you can see how they could be channeled to the betterment of the people living in the Lucayan. El Sabio's vision was just too shuttered to understand it. It's going to take some time to learn how to use it.
                                       thebody
                                    With this understanding, I have to stand against the Crown.
                                       strategy "challenge"
                                       privateer -100
                                      You see now what the Crown's settlements have done to the Lucayan's own life energies. Conversion of the sea's magic to the monarchy's stricter form is stifling the flow, containing what should be free. You are now the Lucayan's protector. You must keep her safe.
                                       thebody
                                I slice my hand; the power can be used to aid the Crown.
                                   privateer 30
                                   powerclaim
                                 (strategy="crown") I let the magic fade with the Pirate King's death.
                                  "Let this be the end of the Pirate King," you say. El Sabio looks afraid for just a moment, and then his eyes are blank. The energy in the air around you fades like the end of a thunderstorm, and you are alone on the deck of the [i]León[/i] with the body of the former Pirate King.
								  
                                  All that's left now is to take El Sabio's body to the Crown Navy for the bounty.
                                   piratekingbounty
                                 (anneequal) I claim the magic in hopes of being able to share it with Anne later.
                                  You don't know if there's a way you'll be able to share this with Anne, but you can't let this opportunity be wasted!
                                   powerclaim
                            
                               deathbymonarch
                              Unfortunately, a simple trick just isn't enough. And what's worse,
                               deathbymonarch2
                              by distracting your own efforts, you've given him the opening he needs to take you down.
							  
                               deathbymonarch3
                              He lunges with the sword cane, and you twist. Everything moves in slow motion, and you can't tell if it's some sort of magic or cambiar or just a trick of the mind. The blade, which might have only pierced a lung before—and that would be bad enough—sinks through your ribs. By moving to avoid it, you drive the blade directly into your heart.
							  
                               deathbymonarch4
                              Your blood gushes around the cold steel, and you stagger, your body not realizing that it is already dead. First, you hit your knees, and then your chest is on the deck, driving the blade even farther through your back. Blood pools around you, sinking into the wood of the deck.
							  
                              "You could have been great," El Sabio murmurs next to you.
							  
                              And then, there is only darkness.
                               dead true
                               captainjones true
                              _scene 9zdeath
                          I dart into the rigging and come at him from above.
                             sail > 60
                              The line on this ship is odd, but there's still rigging to climb, and you can force him to chase you into it. You dart aloft, still meeting him blow for blow, as the two of you swing back and forth up toward the crow's nest. You finally have an advantage to counter his speed: you're faster in the rigging than he is. While he's been living the quiet life on his hacienda, you've been working your ship. Your hands and feet know rigging better than land, and the rock and sway as you climb feels just like home.
							  
                              Finally, El Sabio slips, and your blade finds its opening. He looks at you in shock before he tumbles. The fall itself would have killed a lesser man, but you see the very deck of the [i]León[/i] rise up to cradle him in the fall. You swing down to the deck, and El Sabio looks at you as though he is seeing you for the first time.
                               deaththrows
                            
                              You go to climb the line, but find that it's not where you expected it to be, and what should have been a simple trick ends up being a distraction. And
                               deathbymonarch2
                          I distract him with conversation.
                             parleydistract
                            "Give it up, old man," you jeer. If you can get him talking, that's the simplest trick in the book.
							
                             parley > 60
                              "You do not understand what you are throwing away," El Sabio says. "The whole of the Lucayan looks to the Pirate King…"
							  
                              But what he might have said next, you'll never know. Because as he seeks to convince you one last time, you drive your cutlass into his ribs, piercing through to the other side. Your faces are nearly touching as you finish the blow, and he looks at you in surprise. Then, with one last bit of strength, he pushes himself from your blade and falls to the deck.
                               deaththrows
                            
                               deathbymonarch
                      
                        But every time you think you can land a blow, he parries, his sword cane flashing in the cave's low light. Worse, he uses cambiar in tandem, as easily as breathing, and the deck rocks beneath you. The breath is stolen from your lungs, and you have to throw your arms wide just to stay upright.
						
                        Which makes it terribly easy for the blade to sink between your ribs.

                         deathbymonarch3
                    I can match him with cambiar.
                      When it comes down to life or death, you trust your skill with cambiar more than your cutlass, though you keep the naked blade ready in your hand. You begin chanting, drawing on the natural world around you—the air, the sea, the wood in the deck beneath your feet. You tap its life energies, and you begin to make things change. At first, it resists—you feel the ship's allegiance to the Pirate King. But you push, just a little harder, and the resistance gives way. The leonine figurehead responds to your call. Shaking itself free from the prow of the ship, the lion surges toward El Sabio, who wears a maniacal grin on his weatherbeaten face. He, too, begins chanting, his sword cane drawn and flashing starlight and flames, despite the walls of the cave.
					  
                      The lion charges, and the sea surges up to meet it, splintering into shards of ice that pierce the lion's wooden skin.
                       cambiar > 70
                        You feel sweat trickle down your brow as the lion roars, then shakes off the damage. You whip the wind into the rising waters, pushing them back. The coils of line in the sails snake down, snapping at the lion as it continues toward El Sabio, who dances out of its way, the deck itself rising to block your lion's attacks. He never falters in his chanting, and as you flag from the energy you're using, you wonder if he can outlast you.
						
                        You need something to turn the advantage.
                        
                          I charge with my cutlass.
                             pistols > 60
                              El Sabio is focused on your lion and your winds; he doesn't expect you to attack with your blade. You burst forward in a rush of energy, like the wind snapping a luffed sail, and he barely parries, his sword cane sending your blade skittering aside. But it's a sloppy block, and it leaves his chest wide open. You drive your cutlass home.
							  
                               elsabioshock
                            
                              El Sabio is focused on your lion and your winds; he won't expect you to attack head-on. But as you commit fully to your attack, you realize he was waiting for this moment all along.
							  
                               deathbymonarch3
                          I distract him with conversation.
                             parleydistract
                          I dart into the rigging and come at him from above.
                             sail > 60
                              The line on this ship is odd, but there's still rigging to climb, and though he doesn't technically have to follow you, from this height you have greater command of the winds. The line, at your touch, begins to listen to you as well, and El Sabio finds himself darting away from coils of rope that have come alive as snakes. You call more of the deck to your command, and El Sabio is forced to climb after you, his sword cane drawn. You finally have an advantage to counter his speed: you're faster in the rigging than he is. While he's been living the quiet life on his hacienda, you've been working your ship. Your hands and feet know rigging better than land, and the rock and sway as you climb feels just like home.
							  
                              You both call to the line, and it shifts and tangles around you, forcing you to draw your cutlass to avoid the magical attacks. Finally, El Sabio slips, and you use your cutlass not to defend, but to attack. You pierce his side; he looks at you in shock before he tumbles. The fall itself would have killed a lesser man, but you see the very deck of the [i]León[/i] rise up to cradle him in the fall. You swing down to the deck, and El Sabio looks at you as though he is seeing you for the first time.
                               deaththrows
                            
                              You go to climb the line, but find that it's not where you expected it to be, and what should have been a simple trick ends up being a distraction. And
                               deathbymonarch2
                      
                        Sweat soaks your body as you force the lion back to its feet. Both you and the lion are buffeted again by the sea, its stinging needles of ice and salt piercing you with tiny cuts, shredding the figurehead's tough hide. You know you won't be able to hold against the onslaught long….
						
                        But then you realize you won't need to, because El Sabio has used your distraction to draw his sword cane and close the gap between you.
                         deathbymonarch3
                    I pretend to stand down, then stab him when he's not expecting it.
                       ((parley  skullduggery) > 130)
                        You've made your entire career about subterfuge and trickery. It's all been rehearsal for this moment. You exchange a few blows, making it clear that El Sabio is the better swordsman, and when the moment is right, you let him bat your cutlass out of your hand. Rather than allowing his sword-point at your throat, you dash backward, cringing.
						
                        "Mercy," you say, both hands pleading. You stumble, falling for just a moment before scrambling backward again. It's enough of a distraction to allow you to palm your dagger. "I'm outmatched and outwitted. I surrender to you, El Sabio, the Pirate King."
						
                        The Pirate King, once so ruthless he would not have accepted your surrender, has grown tired of slaughter, just as you anticipated. "Accepted," he says, approaching you cautiously. But when it's clear to him that you mean no further harm, he reaches out his hand to pull you to your feet.
						
                        Your dagger sinks into his chest up to the hilt, and his blood flows warm onto your hand.
                         elsabioshock
                      
                        Subterfuge and trickery have never been your strengths, but you don't think you can win otherwise. You exchange a few blows, making it clear that El Sabio is the better swordsman. But it's no act; he really does bat your sword out of your hand and send it clattering to the deck. You dash backward, cringing.
						
                        "Mercy," you say, both hands pleading. You stumble, falling for just a moment before scrambling backward again, trying to cover up the movement of your hand to your dagger. "I'm outmatched and outwitted. I surrender to you, El Sabio, the Pirate King."
						
                        But whether the Pirate King is as ruthless as he always has been, or whether he's seen through your act, you'll never know. He chants, and the deck pushes you to your feet. Line lashes out and grabs you by the wrists, holding you upright. El Sabio strides to you purposefully, then, without ceremony, stabs you clean through.

                         deathbymonarch4
            
               aslongasIlive
              "But as long as I do live, I will protect her. Do you understand now? Or do you still see the Crown as the savior of the Lucayan?"
              
                I remain loyal; for civilization!
                   bathingthelion
                 (loaded) I shoot him while he's monologuing.
                  Sure, he's watching you, but he's expecting an answer in words, not in action.
				  
                  You've always been fond of action.

                   sneakattack
                It's not that simple; both sides are right from their own point of view.
                  "And yet, we remain divided," he acknowledges. "I'm afraid there isn't much time to consider where your allegiance lies."
                   merryband
                If he's the protector of the Lucayan, my allegiance should be to him.
                   strategy "warn"
                   merryband
                If the Pirate King has that much power, I'm taking over. Attack!
                   strategy "challenge"
                  El Sabio may be surprised by your quick change of strategy, but the [i]León[/i] isn't. The moment you attack, the deck rises up under your feet, tossing you to the ground. You roll back to your toes, ready for a second attempt.
                   bathingthelion
                I think I'd be a better Pirate King.
                   strategy "challenge"
                  "I'm unswayed," you tell El Sabio. "I challenge you for the title of Pirate King."
				  
                  El Sabio squares off against you. "Well then, let us see who is Pirate King, and who is dead."
                   bathingthelion

          
             strategy "crown"
               merryband
              The power continues to build around El Sabio, and you can see the sweat beading on his brow. "Join me, ${surname}. Join the fleet of the Pirate King. Protect the Lucayan from those who would control her."
              
                I agree to serve under the Pirate King.
                   fleetmember true
                  "I'm honored to be a part of your fleet," you tell the Pirate King, and for the moment, you find you mean it.
				  
                  He draws his sword cane across his palm, then holds the bloodied blade out toward you. "A drop of blood to seal our contract."
				  
                  You allow him to slice your hand, and your blood mingles with his. You feel a buzzing in the back of your mind, an awareness that crawls up your spine like hermit crabs skittering around the beach. It's like you have extra fingers, moving of their own accord, and you can feel water beneath them, cool and wet.
				  
                  "Those are the other ships of the fleet," El Sabio says. "You'll get used to the sensation."
				  
                  You're not entirely sure you will. "We still need to deal with the Crown Navy," you remind him.
				  
                  "I welcome your suggestion," he says.
                   alternatestrategy
                I ally myself with the Pirate King, but only for today.
                   beerafter true
                  "I didn't come here seeking an alliance," you say, "and I've no interest in joining your fleet. But I'll ally myself with you for now, because I think we have a better chance saving San Alfonso together than I do alone."
                   surprisesurprise
                I don't need the Pirate King to defend San Alfonso!
                   elsabio 25
                   beerafter true
                  "I've handled myself just fine without your help, old man. 
                   ghosthero
                    I defeated the [i]Mutiny[/i]. 
                   luscahero
                    I defeated the Lusca. 
                  I'll save San Alfonso on my own if I have to."
				  
                  He raises a brow at your disrespect, but seems impressed by it in spite of himself. "Perhaps when this is all over, you and I can have a drink together and you can tell me just how you'd change things if you were Pirate King." He spreads his arms wide in a gesture of peace. "In the meantime, though you say you don't need me, I offer my help in the plan you clearly already have."

                   flagship
                I find I'm loyal to the Crown after all.
                  "I won't join a band of pirates at the cost of civilization," you say firmly.
                   bathingthelion
                *selectable_if (loaded) I shoot him.
                   ruthless 10
                  He's got his guard down, so you take the opportunity to exploit that distraction.
                   sneakattack
                I try to convince him that the only way to save San Alfonso is to turn him in to the Crown.
                   elsabio 10
                   ruthless -30
                  "You want to protect the Lucayan?" you plead. "You can't defeat the Crown. Not forever. You can hold them off, maybe for another few years, but not forever. They are the future. And if you truly love these seas, you will find a way to make that transition happen without bloodshed on San Alfonso's shores."
				  
                   parley > 70
                    You're almost surprised that the Pirate King is listening to you, but there's a reason he's called El Sabio. Your words of wisdom must match with the future he has seen himself. "What are you suggesting?"
					
                    "Only one sacrifice is necessary to save San Alfonso and preserve as much of her way of life as we can," you say. You look at him pointedly, and he sighs.

                    "There is not much time to end this without violence," you urge. "Do you love your life so much that you will sacrifice your city to save it?"
					
                    "Would you end yours so easily?" he snaps, but he looks tired—exhausted. "I cannot believe that my time is over. That the Lucayan must change forever."
					
                    "But you do," you insist. "Otherwise you would have attacked me already for suggesting it."
					
                    He shakes his head. "I cannot allow these powers to die with me," he says quietly. "And if you are right, and this is the only way, you must take the powers yourself as I die."
					  
                    Then, faster than you'd have expected from the old man, he stabs his sword cane through his stomach.
                     deaththrows
                  
                     bathingthelion
            
               aslongasIlive
    
       strategy  "crown"
        I haven't been displeased with your efforts, though I think you've some way to go." He shrugs, as though intending to take any sting from his words. "I think I would have recruited you eventually, and now, I see, there's little choice."
         jointheclub
      
        I think you're misguided in your allegiance to the Crown, and you have some way to go to be truly impressive." He shrugs, as though intending to take any sting from his words. "I expected to recruit you eventually, if I could turn your head toward freedom and away from monarchy. But now the choice must be made quickly, and I have to offer you a place."
         jointheclub
   (strategy  "warn") I load my pistol.
     loademup
     loaded true
    There's no sense in wasting a perfectly good opportunity to reload your pistol, especially when your foe is looking the other way. It takes a few moments, but when you've finished, El Sabio is still staring at the ship's compass, so you make your way over.
     compass
  I take a look around deck.
    It isn't every day you get to take a close-up look at the Pirate King's flagship, after all. She's beautiful, certainly, but there's something odd about her rigging.
     sail > 65
      There's just not enough line on deck to properly account for the number of sails and the way they're rigged. If the ship were underway, there'd be no way for the crew to make all the adjustments normally made from deck.
    You can't quite figure it out, so you decide not to give it further thought.
    
      I catch up with El Sabio.
         compass
       (strategy  "warn") I load my pistol.
         loademup
      I look at the figurehead.
        At the ship's prow is a lifelike lion, both front paws raised as though it's ready to pounce. You look at the helm to make sure El Sabio hasn't noticed you, and when you turn back, you're surprised to see that one of the paws has dropped. Was there only one raised in the first place? Maybe you need more sleep. You're still looking at it when you hear El Sabio come on deck behind you. 
		
        As you turn,
         appraisal
      I want to see what's below deck.
        You head below to see what you can find out about the ship. Unfortunately, all the berths are empty, so there's little to learn about the crew. Even worse, the hold is empty as well. Just what does El Sabio do with this ship?
        
          I return to the main deck.
             main
            As you reach the deck, you see El Sabio looking for you. He's finished whatever he was doing, and now he leaves the helm to meet you in the middle of the ship.
			
             appraisal
           (strategy  "crown") I find a way to sabotage the ship.
             skullduggery 20
            You saw a pinion drill at a bench you assume belongs to the ship's carpenter. Although all the tools are pristine, there are fewer of them than you'd expect, and you're surprised at how many of them look completely unused. You take the pinion drill and head below decks, making for the bilge pumps. There, you bore a few holes in strategic places.
			  
            After your third hole, you go back to check on the first one you made, and you realize it's closed itself. A ship that heals on its own? Ridiculous. But you've wasted enough time on this endeavor; El Sabio will soon wonder where you've gotten to. You head back above.
			  
             main
          I keep looking in the hold.
             greed 20
             wealth 50
            Any good smuggling ship has secret panels and compartments. Although you're not sure this ship has ever had to survive scrutiny from a Crown boarding party, you think it's a good bet that there are some hidden pockets in the cargo hold.
			
            After another few minutes of looking, you're rewarded when a compartment pops open to reveal a small chest of jewelry, apparently forgotten in unloading. You stick a few gold necklaces in the inner pockets of your coat, feeling cheerful at being a few doubloons richer than you were moments before.
			
            But you decide it's probably time to head back on deck, before El Sabio misses you.

             main
   (strategy  "warn") I attack him when he turns his back.
    Your pistol may not be loaded, but you have your sword and your wits.
     cambiar > 50
      You have your magic.
    You follow him toward the helm, but the moment you are out of his peripheral vision, you draw your sword. He darts out of the way, drawing the blade from inside his cane.
     bathingthelion
		
 blockaderunner

The [i]Galicia[/i] is designed for a small crew, but you're able to wrangle her into shape. All you have to do is get out beyond the blockade, fire a few shots with the cannon, and make a run for it. What could go wrong?

 pirateking
  She responds to you like a dream. She provides all the speed and agility you expected of her and more, echoing the power of the Lucayan that now flows within your veins. She darts like a bluefish, and there are moments when she's gliding over the waves when you almost think she'll fly.
   blockade
  
  It doesn't take long before you see the Crown Navy on the horizon. They've made good time—better than you expected—and you have a feeling they've been waiting for this.
  
  Well, they'll just have to wait a little longer.
  
    Sail into the blockade, then escape.
      There's no way to get their attention like sailing straight into them. Of course, it's the most dangerous option, and it requires the most skill as a sailor.
       ((sail > 70) or (pirateking))
         fame 50
        Fortunately, you're up to the challenge. The [i]Galicia[/i] feels like an extension of you, though you've never moved so smoothly through the water. You set a course downwind, letting her sails fill, speeding along the top of the water.
		
        It doesn't take long before they see your flag. It's not long after that before the cannons start firing. But you're moving too fast; they can't track you quickly enough to adjust the aim. You tack, flying between two ships, both of which fire at you. You're there and gone, but one of the cannons overshoots and hits the other ship. You tack again, cutting closer to one of the other ships, and the ploy works again: she's fired on by her own sisters. The sailors fire their guns alongside, and you return it, just to be polite. Then you tack again, and there are only three more ships between you and the open sea.
		
        Two.
		
        One.
		
        You hear captains shouting to adjust their courses. You hear others screaming that their intelligence was wrong—only the Pirate King could sail through them untouched! You gain some distance, then slow down, daring them, tempting them to follow you.
		
        The Crown fleet turns—resetting their sails, adjusting their headings—and follows after you.
        
         merrychase
        It's a merry chase; for a few hours, every time you tack, the Crown fleet scrambles to track your course. You get too far away and have to adjust upwind to give them a chance to catch up, and then you're off again.
		
        You're still playing with them when other members of the Pirate King's fleet begin to arrive. 
         thefleet
         sanalfonsosavior true
        First a galleon, then a man-o'-war, then a pair of brigs. Assorted cutters and sloops—support ships—sail in the wakes of the larger vessels. All of them are armed to the teeth. And all of them are flying the flag of the Pirate King. You stop running and begin making the wide loop that will turn you around at the head of the gathering fleet.
		
        There's that old joke Anne Read tells at the Lobo Negro, about the captain who asks for his brown pants: you're fairly certain that the commodore leading this Crown fleet is experiencing a similar sensation. It's a shame their uniforms have white trousers.
		
        The battle doesn't last long, if only because the Crown ships realize they've been outmaneuvered. The cheers rise from the Pirate King's fleet, and soon the galleon sails alongside you, her captain—a native man in his sixties, with crisscrossed scars from his forehead to his chin, who you suspect is the infamous Coamo Suerte—hailing you for the news.
		
        And so you explain what transpired with El Sabio.
         piratekingdead

          Suerte listens, his scarred face almost expressionless. When you finish, he shrugs lightly. "The King is dead," he calls out, his voice echoing weirdly among the ships.
           pirateking
             longlive
            Then he grins, and it might be sardonic. "Long live the King," he continues.

             newking
            A cheer goes up from the crews, and if their captains are a little less enthusiastic than the sailors, they don't act against you. Your authority is unchallenged, for now.
			
            "Permission to sail back to San Alfonso to celebrate?" Suerte asks, and you have a feeling it's a test.
            
              Granted. We'll show San Alfonso the strength of the Pirate King's fleet.
                You've just faced down and intimidated the Crown Navy; what is there to fear today? You'll have to fight them again, no doubt, but for now you are confident in the strength of the Pirate King's fleet.
				
                 celebrategoodtimes
                You hear an acknowledgment, and then the shouts of several captains—one a woman in her forties, whose first mate is a young man who bears remarkably similar features to her, another who wears a bright yellow coat and hat—as the ships are given their new headings. It will be a night to celebrate in San Alfonso.
				
                And so it is.
                 drinksallaround
                You find that by the time you arrive, the Lobo Negro is already filled to bursting, and everyone wants to buy you a drink. You'd like to say you remember every moment, but later it becomes a blur of color and heat and cheers, and all you can recall is the elation of success. San Alfonso, for the moment, is safe, and all that can be well is well.
                 piratesfree true
                 Epilogue
              Granted, so long as they raise their own colors.
                 ruthless -20
                There's no sense in revealing the identities of the Pirate King's fleet to pirates who might well sell that information to the Crown.
                 celebrategoodtimes
              Better to stay clear of San Alfonso for now.
                It goes against your own desires—a pint at the Lobo Negro sounds like a perfect way to celebrate—but in order to keep the Crown out of San Alfonso, you may have to sail clear of it for a while as well. "Afraid not, Suerte," you call back, and the scarred man grins at your guessing his identity. "We still need the Crown looking the other way, and once they regroup, they'll be hunting us down."
				
                His smile flashes. "They'll be trying."
				
                He calls out to his crew to set course for Puerta Caballo. The captain of the man-o'-war, who wears a bright yellow coat and hat, shouts to make way for Playa Roja. One of the brig captains, a woman in her forties, whose first mate is a young man with remarkably similar features to her, calls out to head for Puerta de Oro. And the others call out their own headings, everyone dispersing to the ends of the Lucayan.
				
                 starcelebration
                You set a heading for San Alfonso, but with no intention of staying in port tonight. You're there just long enough to resupply ${flagship} and get back out on the waters.
                 wherethewinds
                Tomorrow, maybe you'll make for Costa Blanca, or San Moreno. But for tonight, you're off for a lonely night on the waters of the Lucayan, to celebrate in the black under the stars.
                 piratesfree true
                 Epilogue
          
            "Back to the cove," he barks. He looks at you, shaking his head as his crew adjusts the sails and changes course. "Hell of a mess you've gotten us into."
			
            The other members of the fleet follow in his wake, and you wonder whether the magic is truly gone, or if someone like Suerte will claim it.
			
            But for now, you've done what you intended.
             choiceofports
            
              Make for San Alfonso to celebrate.
                 drinksallaround
              Make for San Alfonso to resupply.
                 starcelebration
              See where the winds take us.
                It's been a long day, and you've a mind to just let the winds carry you where they will.
                 wherethewinds
        
           piratementor
            Suerte listens, his scarred face almost expressionless. "Change in the winds, lads," he calls out, his voice echoing eerily among the ships.
             longlive
          if fleetmember
            Suerte listens, and though his scarred face is hard to read, you can see he's already extended a captain's welcome to you in the fleet. "Well done," he says easily, his voice echoing eerily among the ships. "A pirate's cheer for the Savior of San Alfonso!" he calls out, and the ships around him erupt in hoots and hollers, all of them to your benefit.
			
            When it quiets enough for you to hear him over the throng, he shouts new orders to you as a senior captain in the fleet. "Make for San Alfonso," he says. "There's sure to be celebrating in your honor. Meanwhile, the rest of us will make for other ports. No need to reveal the strength of the fleet to the Crown just yet. Once they regroup, they'll be hunting us down."
				
            You show your teeth. "They'll be trying."
				
            He laughs. "Oh, you'll do just fine," he says, giving you a short salute. He calls out to his crew to set course for Puerta Caballo. The captain of the man-o'-war, who wears a bright yellow coat and hat, shouts to make way for Playa Roja. One of the brig captains, a woman in her forties, whose first mate is a young man with remarkably similar features to her, calls out to head for Puerta de Oro. And the others call out their own headings, everyone dispersing to the ends of the Lucayan.
			
            But it's the home port for you.

             drinksallaround
          
            Suerte listens, his scarred face quirking with amusement when you explain that you're not a member of the Pirate King's fleet. "Well done," he says easily, his voice echoing eerily among the ships. "A pirate's cheer for the Savior of San Alfonso!" he calls out, and the ships around him erupt in hoots and hollers, all of them to your benefit.
			
            When it quiets enough for you to hear him over the throng, he gives you a short salute. "We're headed for other ports. No need to reveal the strength of the fleet—or your temporary alliance with us—to the Crown just yet. Once they regroup, they'll be hunting all of us down."
			
            You show your teeth. "They'll be trying."
			
            He laughs. "I'm sure we'll be seeing more of you, Captain ${moniker}," he says, giving you a short salute. He calls out to his crew to set course for Puerta Caballo. The captain of the man-o'-war, who wears a bright yellow coat and hat, shouts to make way for Playa Roja. One of the brig captains, a woman in her forties, whose first mate is a young man with remarkably similar features to her, calls out to head for Puerta de Oro. And the others call out their own headings, everyone dispersing to the ends of the Lucayan.
             choiceofports
      
        As you begin, everything goes according to plan. But as smoothly as the [i]Galicia[/i] sails, she needs more crew to be truly effective. And the Crown ships? They have plenty of crew to man both sails and cannon.
		
        As you dart between two of the Crown ships, a broadside thunders around you.
         damnedcaseshot
         captainjones true
        You have a moment to realize they've fired case shot—the kind designed to tear right through the bodies of sailors—before it hits and pain explodes in your body. The steering wheel still tight in your hands, you change course as you fall, and you can feel the [i]Galicia[/i] ramming into the ship that hit you before you lose consciousness.
        _scene 9zdeath
    Sail around and behind the navy, then fire at them to tempt them away.
      Sailing through the fleet is just too dangerous, but you've the speed in the [i]Galicia[/i] to get around them and meet up with the Pirate King's fleet from the other side. The trick will be getting them to follow you, but you think you can get their attention with a few well-placed cannon bursts. The [i]Galicia[/i]'s stern chase gun is easily maneuverable, and you've got plenty of chain shot to fire into the rigging. You want them to chase you, but if one of them has to stay behind with damaged rigging, that's probably better for you. No need for all those cannons to be firing in your direction!
	  
       (((sail  pistols) > 110) or (pirateking))
         fame 30
        And the [i]Galicia[/i] does her part beautifully. She feels like an extension of you, though you've never moved so smoothly through the water. You set a course downwind, letting her sails fill, speeding along the top of the water. You're fairly certain the Crown Navy is paying you no notice at this distance, and you intentionally lose sight of them before changing course to come around behind them. You can sail much closer to the wind than they can, and their destination is upwind. It doesn't take long until you're nearly upon them.
		
        And then, you raise the Pirate King's flag. To make sure they're paying attention, you fire that chain shot into one of their sloops. It's not the biggest target, but it's one of the fastest among them, and thus the most dangerous to you. The stern chaser performs wonderfully, and you think not even Caesar could have made a better shot.
		
        The mainmast topples. You have their attention, all right. You change course, watching as their ships—seeing your flag, and thus their believed target—set new headings to follow you.
         merrychase
      
        But the [i]Galicia[/i] doesn't handle as well as you'd like her to when you're on your own, and you're fairly certain you're sailing too close to the fleet; they know what you're up to by the time you change your heading to come around and behind them, and one of the sloops breaks away from the main fleet in order to chase you down. You load the stern chaser just in time to see that the sloop has closed her range. Cannon fire thunders around you, and you fumble with the chaser.

         damnedcaseshot
    Wait for the rest of the Pirate King's fleet to arrive.
       fame 20
      You stay just in sight of the Crown Navy fleet, watching them anxiously as they close on San Alfonso. You have hours yet, you know, and miles between them and the port. But they're tense miles. And you have a feeling that unless something daring is done, the fleet might not arrive in time. It's easy enough to sail around and behind the navy now, and they pay you no attention. You're just about to take matters into your own hands—planning to keep your retreat wide open—when you feel a shift in the wind.
       ((pirateking) or (fleetmember))
        Maybe it's the magic of the Lucayan. You can sense the Pirate King's ships just beyond the horizon.
       endif

      It's your moment to act. You let [i]Galicia[/i] fly as fast as she can go toward the rear of the navy blockade line. You load some chain shot and fire—it's not really meant to hit anything, just to be the opening salvo to get their attention. Because it's then that the fleet begins to arrive.
       thefleet

   sail > 65
    She responds like a dream, and you can tell that she was crafted by true artists. She's fast, and she handles well, even though she was designed for a bigger crew. You're able to keep up with her adjustments to the wind; you think you'd get even better performance out of her with practice. She darts like a bluefish, and if you could coax a little more speed from her over the waves, you think she'd almost fly.
     blockade
  
    She responds well, but you're only one person, and she's designed for a larger crew. You can tell how quickly she'd go if you were a better sailor, and how precisely she'd tack. As it is, keeping her on course is all you can hope for.
     blockade

 flagshipruse

 north
  $!{Flagship} is already at a convenient spot on the north side of the island. It'll be easy enough to sail around and behind the Crown Navy before they come into view. 
   ruse2

   panic
    By the time you reach the docks district of San Alfonso, all chaos has broken loose. "The Crown is coming!" a man shouts to no one in particular. A baker is boarding the windows of her panadería, and a few others are doing the same. But more of the citizens of San Alfonso are ready to flee. While several pirate ships you recognize have already set off from port, trying to escape the catastrophe to come, there are plenty of ships still in the harbor. Not many are the type that takes passengers, but this doesn't keep people from begging, bartering, or bribing their way aboard. 
	
    The chaos cuts into what precious time you have to beat the fleet, and as you board ${flagship}, you see a number of people aboard you don't recognize.
     crew < 50
      And a number of crew members are conspicuously absent.
     endif
    
     plan
    Caesar sidles up next to you. "Is there a plan?" he asks, his low voice rumbling below the ruckus of the port, so that no one can hear him but you.
	
    "Of course!" you say cheerfully, and explain.
     ruse2
  if defenses
    By the time you reach the docks district of San Alfonso, shopkeepers are boarding up their windows, and what artillery the port has is being primed and prepared. You knew that San Alfonso had cannon defenses. You didn't know quite how large they were. What you'd always taken to be decorative monuments along the port walk have been shifted, opened, or moved to reveal a series of fifty-pound guns. That's in addition to the sixty-four-pound tower gun atop Carolina de la Playa's office, which you know has a 360-degree traverse. She sometimes threatens to use it on brawlers who tumble out of the Lobo Negro and make a ruckus.
	
    Well. If the navy gets close enough to port, the people will be as ready as they can be. In the meantime, ships are taking on passengers—you see de la Playa's clerks handing coin purses over to the first mates of several ships, so you can guess their motivation—and there's an organized retreat headed up into the jungle. Hopefully, that will be enough.
	
    As you board ${flagship}, 
     plan
  if evacuation
    By the time you reach the docks district of San Alfonso, an organized evacuation effort is underway. Caesar stands next to Carolina de la Playa, directing the efforts of citizens and pirates alike. It looks as though several of the pirate ships have already set off from port, likely not waiting to take passengers, but many are following the instructions of the Capitán de Puerto. You notice some money changing hands as her aides count out passenger fares, and you suspect that's part of why everyone here seems to be cooperating so smoothly.
	
    You see the librarian organizing another group of citizens, putting together supplies to head into the jungle. It's almost as if she's had a contingency plan for an interior evacuation for years; you see her looking over her evacuees and directing them almost as though she's organizing the pieces on a chess board. They'll be in good hands if the city falls. Though hopefully it won't come to that.
	
    Caesar sees you and takes his leave of de la Playa. "Did things go well?" he asks.
	
    "Well enough that I have a plan," you answer breezily, and explain.
     ruse2
  
    San Alfonso is eerily calm when you walk through it—which is to say, everything is normal, and it only seems eerie because you know what's coming next.
     sabotage
       acting
    
      
        I tell Carolina de la Playa to evacuate.
          The more de la Playa knows in advance, the better, just in case your plan doesn't work. You can't imagine San Alfonso's defenses will be enough, given how hard the Crown is likely to come down on the city if they're confident they can capture the Pirate King, so getting the people of the port out—or inland—should be everyone's first priority.
           delaplaya
	
          You reach the office of the Capitán de Puerto and hurry inside. Carolina de la Playa is at her desk while two clerks run interference with sailors looking for assistance or loans or purchases. You ignore the clerks and the other sailors and march straight to de la Playa's desk. The clerks protest, but when de la Playa looks up, she gives no indication she's surprised, or irritated, that you've skipped the usual procedure.
	
          "Captain ${surname}," she says tersely.
           debt > 0
            "Your payment is late as usual."
	  
            It isn't, actually. You paid on time. But that's her usual greeting.

            "This is more important," you say.
			
            Her lips purse, half-amused. "I find that hard to believe."
           endif

          "I have news."
	
          She laces her fingers in front of her, waiting for you to go on.
	
          "The Crown Navy is preparing to attack San Alfonso," you say, aware of how the room goes quiet behind you. As you explain what you know, de la Playa's usually placid face hardens, and you see an edge of violence behind the expression. She stands, and gone is the unflappable dockmaster; in her place is a pirate captain whose clipped orders are ignored at a crew's peril. Her clerks, and the sailors in her office, seem to recognize this.
		  
          "All who can't, or aren't willing to, fight should head inland or ship out," she says. "In the meantime, we'll man the cannons and send out a perimeter fleet. If we can't stop them, we'll go to Davy Jones trying."
		  
          "Keep the ships out of sight, if you can," you tell her. "I have a plan that won't work if we're guarding San Alfonso too obviously."
		  
           fame > 55
            She nods, prepared to follow your lead, which would leave you speechless for a moment if timing weren't so important. Stopping off to tell de la Playa has you running behind as it is. You hurry back to ${flagship}, where
             plan
          
            She nods, but she looks skeptical. She's not used to taking orders from you, and she doesn't seem inclined to start. Still, you've given her what warning you can. You hurry back to ${flagship}, where
             plan
        I tell Carolina de la Playa to ready the town's defenses.
          The more de la Playa knows in advance, the better, just in case your plan doesn't work. You can't imagine San Alfonso's defenses will be enough, given how hard the Crown is likely to come down on the city if they're confident they can capture the Pirate King, but any defense is better than no defense at all.
           delaplaya
        I act like everything is normal.
           acting
          You do your best to act the part, tipping your hat to pirates you've shared drinks with and ignoring the scurvy dogs you always avoid. You can go about your mission faster if there's no chaos to stumble over on your way.
		  
          $!{Flagship} is just the way you left her, and you realize that despite all that's happened, you haven't actually been gone that long. As you board,
           plan
 ruse2  
All you have to do is convince the navy ships that you're the Pirate King's flagship and get them to chase you down.
  
Then you have to outrun them, of course. But you've done that before. Piece of cake.
  
You hope.

  Sail hard and fast and hope they take the bait.
    You set your course for a northerly approach, making sure that points them in the direction of a port other than San Alfonso. $!{Flagship} flies, sailing as well as you've ever seen her, as though the ship itself can sense your urgency. It takes a few hours before you see the line of Crown Navy ships, but there they are, just where you expected them. Tinima fills your sails, so that regardless of where the real wind is coming from, you've got a downwind heading, and you're moving knots faster than the navy. It doesn't take long until you're nearly upon them.
		
    And then, you raise the Pirate King's flag. You tack, showing your broadsides, and just to make sure they're paying attention, you fire a load of chain shot into one of the outlying sloops. It's a bit of overkill given how much larger you are than the poor little sloop, but you figure if you're going to make a statement, you might as well give it your all.
		
    The mainmast topples. You have their attention, all right. You change course, watching as their ships—seeing your flag, and thus their believed target—set new headings to follow you.
     sail > 65
       fame 30
       merrychase
    
       
      The problem becomes that, while you may have the faster ship—and you're not actually sure about that—they have more ships. And more guns. And more cambiantes. If you were in a smaller ship, it might be harder for them to steal your wind, but you have big sails, and while Tinima is more than a match for any single cambiante, she can't take on the changes made by a whole fleet of them.
	  
      And then there are the cannons. You keep your crew firing, but it doesn't dissuade enough of their ships from getting close. The cutters are enough trouble, and they're small. It's when the two-decker—one of the prides of the navy's fleet, you imagine—comes alongside that you know you've got problems. Their cannons—thirty-seven in a single broadside, which hardly seems fair—fire.

       damnedcaseshot
  Make our disguise so convincing that they can't help but chase us.
    You've already got a good start; ${flagship} has earned a little infamy with the Crown already. But to emphasize that, you've got to make her look like the pride of the Pirate King's fleet. And you have to sail in such a way that it seems that you [i]don't[/i] want to get caught, rather than that you're trying to get them to chase you.
     skullduggery > 65
       fame 30
      The first is partly a matter of smartening her up: as you sail, you set your usual boarding crew to work tidying anything that's disorderly. But you also need to make a statement, and that comes with adding a little bit of gilding to the figurehead—Tinima convinces a few doubloons to flow into the detail work on the figurehead so it gleams—and disguising some barrels as additional cannons with a bit of pitch and paint. At a distance, you'll look as armed as shark's teeth, and arrogant enough to be what the Crown expects from pirate royalty.
	  
      By the time you see the outlying sloops scouting for the Crown Navy, you're prepared. The Pirate King's flag is sailing high above your deck, daring them to come after you. You watch tensely as you get closer to them, knowing that drawing too much closer will blow the ruse that you're trying to escape them.
	  
      And then, through your spyglass, you see it. The closest sloop changes heading to come after you, and the nearest ships follow suit. "Set a course to look like we're fleeing," you tell Caesar, and he relays the orders while you keep your eye in the spyglass. Another navy ship adjusts her course. Another. And then the rest fall in line. You've got them.
	  
      Now all you have to do is get away.

       merrychase
    
      You figure it will be enough to smarten her up a bit and fly the Pirate King's flag openly. You set your usual boarding crew to work tidying up anything that looks disorderly. By the time you see the outlying sloops scouting for the Crown Navy, you're prepared. The Pirate King's flag is sailing high above your deck, daring them to come after you. You watch tensely as you get closer to them, knowing that drawing too much closer will blow the ruse that you're trying to escape them.
	  
      But they don't take the bait. Oh, a few of them peel off after you, because whether or not you're the real Pirate King, you are flying his flag. But the rest continue on their course toward San Alfonso. Worse, the ships following you have several cambiantes. And lots of guns. And not a lot of patience for pirates. You're still working on a secondary plan when you discover you're within range of their cannons. 

       damnedcaseshot
  Hail the ships and taunt them so they follow.
    You have the utmost faith in your ability to convince people to believe you when you talk to them. And besides, it'll make an amazing story once you've done it. You can see the broadsheets now: Captain ${moniker} makes fools of the Crown Navy with ${pronounhis} eloquent art of insult. As long as you can outrun them once it's done, you're fine.
	
    "Because there's nothing that could possibly go wrong with this plan," Caesar mutters under his breath. But he gives the orders, and you set course to intercept the navy.
	
    You change course a few times to make it less obvious you're sailing directly from San Alfonso, and that way you'll be to one side of the navy fleet, rather than directly in the center, which would be more problematic to escape from. After a few hours, you see them, and you set a course for their nearest outlying sloop.
    
      Pretend to be hailing them for news, then shoot a broadside into them.
         fame 30
        Talking is good, but it's better when it's backed by firepower. You hail the sloop and get close enough to shout at each other.
		
        "What news is there from civilization?" you yell.
		
        "You'd best clear these waters," says the lieutenant holding the speaking trumpet. "Set a heading for—"
		
        "I'm sorry, what's that?" you holler back.
		
        "Set a heading for—"
		
        "I can't hear you over the cannon fire," you yell with a shrug, pointing to your ears.
		
        Which is, of course, the signal your crew has been waiting for. They fire your full broadside in eardrum-shattering unison, sending chain shot flying into the sloop's sails. The sheets rip into satisfying shreds, billowing uselessly against the Lucayan wind. Caesar raises the flag of the Pirate King, and Tinima shifts the winds.

         ((parley  pistols) > 120)
          The chain shot careens into their mainmast even as you're changing course, and you hear a satisfying crack. The lieutenant at the speaking trumpet is quick to relay the news of your attack to any who hadn't already seen it, and it looks like the entire navy is taking the bait. All you have to do is stay ahead of them.
		  
           merrychase
        
          The chain shot damages their sails, but the mast stays intact. The sloop changes heading, and you can see the lieutenant with the speaking trumpet calling out red-faced orders to the nearest ships. The problem is, only some of the ships peel off to challenge you. The rest continue on their course toward San Alfonso.
		  
          But the worse problem is that the ships following you have several cambiantes. And lots of guns. And not a lot of patience for pirates. You're still working on a secondary plan when you discover you're within range of their cannons. 

           damnedcaseshot
      Sail in close, then moon them.
         fame 50
        You'll have to sail a little closer than you'd really like to make the point dramatically, but there's nothing like a good universal symbol of disrespect to get the attention of the Crown Navy. You signal for conversation, and as you sail closer, you and your usual boarding crew line up along the rail.
		
        The lieutenant at the sloop's speaking trumpet shouts at you. "Unidentified ship, change your heading to—"
		
        But wherever he'd like you to go, you don't know, because you think he's swallowed his own tongue. A row of bare pirate bottoms can do that.

         ((parley  sail) > 120)
          You cackle with laughter as Tinima fills your sails and your crew changes heading perpendicular to the sloop's small—but still dangerous—broadside. They fire, but you're not caught with your pants around your ankles; the shot goes wide, and you're back at the helm and fully clothed before they can come around.
           merrychase
        
          You cackle with laughter as Tinima fills your sails to change heading, but you've come in too close. The sloop fires her cannons, and though there aren't many of them, you've made yourself an easy target.
		  
          The Crown has caught you with your pants around your ankles. The blast of the cannons fills your ears.
           damnedcaseshot
      Give them an ultimatum backed with cambiar.
        You hail the sloop and get close enough to shout at each other.
		
        "You need to clear these waters," shouts the lieutenant with the speaking trumpet. "Set a heading for—"

         (((parley  cambiar) > 120) or (pirateking))
           fame 50
          "No, you need to clear these waters," you say, amplifying your voice with cambiar. The entire Crown fleet can hear you. "The Lucayan is under my protection, and you are invaders here."
		  
          You raise your arms, calling on your cambiar, and you feel Tinima adding her strength to yours to make this display as impressive as possible. The sea rises up at your call, and a wave as tall as your crow's nest surges between you and the Crown ships. As it crashes, you adjust your heading away from the Crown ships, certain they'll follow. They can't leave this attack unchallenged, but you can't appear to be fleeing, either. Leading them on a chase now will be a difficult balance.
		  
          Luckily, you have a head start. Not only has your wave pushed them all off of their headings, but the sloop you hailed has capsized, which is no mean accomplishment. You calmly retreat without giving the appearance of running away, and soon the Crown ships come around to follow you.
           merrychase
        
           fame 25
          "No, you need to clear these waters," you say, amplifying your voice with cambiar. But it doesn't come out in a regal way, and you think only the nearest of the Crown ships heard you. "The Lucayan is under my protection, and you are invaders here."
		  
          You raise your arms, calling on your cambiar, and though you feel Tinima giving you a boost, the wave you raise isn't the tidal wave you'd hoped for. It crashes into the nearest ships, but you've only adjusted their headings for them—now they're in a position to follow you more quickly. Tinima calls the winds and tries to use the water to hold them back, but their cambiantes launch their own countermeasures, and soon they're within firing range. Their cannons fire loudly around you, filling the air with smoke.

           damnedcaseshot
  
 portdefense

 panic
  Or, rather, it would be if anyone were paying attention. By the time you reach the docks district of San Alfonso, all chaos has broken loose. "The Crown is coming!" a man shouts to no one in particular. A baker is boarding the windows of her panadería, and a few others are doing the same. But more of the citizens of San Alfonso are ready to flee. While several pirate ships you recognize have already set off from port, trying to escape the catastrophe to come, there are plenty of ships still in the harbor. Not many are the type that takes passengers, but that doesn't keep people from begging, bartering, or bribing their way aboard. 
  
  All of that is about to come to an end. The [i]León[/i] has a speaking trumpet, and you raise it to your lips.
  
   calltoaction
  "People of San Alfonso!" you call out, and your voice booms across the port louder than, by any rights, it should.
  
     (pirateking) I claim the title of Pirate King and claim their allegiances.
       pistols 50
       fleet 20
      "I am the new Pirate King!" you call out. "Too long we have been ruled by an old man who could not defend us from the Crown. But now, united, we will defend our home and keep the Crown from our shores!"
	  
      There's something in the magic of the Lucayan that speaks to her people—and say what you will about pirates, they are creatures of their sea. The Lucayan moves them and they listen, ready to serve and fight at your side.
	  
       setacourse
      And so, after you get your crew aboard the [i]León[/i], you set a course for the Crown Navy. In the hours of sailing away from the port, you see your fleet grow—other pirate ships hail fleeing vessels or passersby. You think there are even a few fishing boats tagging along, crewed by islanders who have no use for the Crown. Every ship helps; the point is to look impressive, shoot an overwhelming amount of cannon-shot into the navy, and convince them to retreat.
	  
      Of course, it all looks good on paper. When you see just how many ships they've brought out, the reality sinks in. There are a lot of you.
	  
      There are more ships of the Crown Navy. And they're better armed and better disciplined.
	  
      But they're not fighting for their homes.
      
        Let the pirates fire as they will.
           firewhenready
        Hold fire until we're in range.
           ((pistols > 70) or (fleet > 25))
             fame 50
            They start firing at you as soon as you begin to close, well before you're inside of their cannon range. You don't waste your ammunition. You have Caesar give commands to the other ships of the pirate fleet by flag, telling them to hold on until you're in range.

            Closer. A cannonball crashes into the water twenty yards in front of you. Closer. Chain shot whips toward your masthead, sinking only yards beyond you.
		
            Someone fires a broadside before you give the signal, and Caesar heaves a heavy sigh. That's what comes of leading independently minded pirates.
		
            "Fire," you order with a grin, and Caesar gives the signal. The rest of the pirate fleet comes alight as the fuses are lit, and the cannons begin to fire.
		
            It's a mass of chaos and confusion and gunsmoke, but you can tell you're convincing the Crown that their plan to raid San Alfonso was a poor one. With a few more ships, you'd send them packing.
            
             thefleet
          
            But though you've given the order to hold, the pirates are unused to taking orders from anyone.
             firewhenready
             fame 20
            The Crown ships start firing as soon as you begin to close, and the pirate fleet fires back with abandon. You're not really close enough to create anything but smoke and confusion, but you're sure you'll get in a lucky hit. "Load the heated shot," you say, even though it's a bit dangerous. "Let's sink as many as we can!"
	   
            There are cheers from your crew, and you hear similar shouts from the other ships of the pirate fleet. But the truth is that you're outgunned and outmaneuvered, and unless something dramatic changes, this will be the last stand for the pirates of San Alfonso.
            
            But then, the winds change.
             thefleet
        Sail toward the Crown ships with no fear.
           fame 30
          You're outgunned and probably outmaneuvered, but you're not about to let the Crown think you're afraid.
		  
          "Tinima," you call out. "Fill the sails, if you would."
		  
          "Aye, Captain," Tinima answers, and soon you've got a full downwind speed, straight toward the Crown Navy. Others among the pirate fleet follow your example, and soon most of your ships are bearing down on the Crown fleet. The navy ships begin to fire as soon as you begin to close, even though you're out of range. Perhaps you've put a bit of fear in their hearts.
		  
          Then their cannonballs start to blow holes in the pirate fleet's ships, and you think perhaps what is in their hearts isn't fear.
		  
          "Fire!" you hear one of the other captains call, and soon the sea is a roar of cannon fire and smoke, and you have no idea if you will win or if this is the last stand for the pirates of San Alfonso.
          
          And then, the winds change.
           thefleet
    I give a rousing speech about loyalty and defending our home.
       parley > 70
         pistols 50
         fleet 15
        Honestly, it's not the kind of speech that usually appeals to pirates, but something about the way you deliver it brings tears to the eyes of several of the hardest drinkers you know from the Lobo Negro. They raise their fists in the air and shout in agreement. Even the ships that looked about to retreat start shouting their allegiance, banging swords against the rails and preparing to sail where you lead them.
		
         setacourse
      
        It's not the kind of speech that usually appeals to pirates, and you can tell it's not hitting your audience quite the way you'd like.
         youdlike
        Several of the fleeing ships continue right on fleeing, but some shout in approval of your words. Others take up the cry of "[i]León[/i]!" and the name of the Pirate King's vessel encourages them to join up.
		
        You have a fleet. It's not as big as the one you were hoping for, but you think it will be enough.
         setacourse
    "The Pirate King wants to know who'd like to give the Crown a black eye!"
      It's exactly the kind of challenge that pirates usually cheer at the Lobo Negro, but it's a bit different knowing that the Crown is sending an entire fleet against you.
       parley > 60
        But the pirates listen. They raise their fists in the air and shout in agreement. Even the ships that looked about to retreat start shouting their allegiance, banging swords against the rails and preparing to sail where you lead them.
		
         setacourse
      
         youdlike
    I offer a reward to the ship that brings down the first Crown vessel.
       pistols 50
       fleet 20
      It's not really your money to offer, but you know how to convince pirates to cooperate. They'll risk their necks for enough gold.

      And listen they do. Not all of them, of course. A few still sail off. But most of them start challenging each other, placing bets on how many ships they can take down. It's the traditional pirate preparation for a boarding action writ large-scale.
	  
      You have a fleet. Disorderly and distracted, but a fleet. You're ready to see what they can do.
       setacourse
if defenses
  And you're lucky that Carolina de la Playa recognizes it. By the time you reach the docks district of San Alfonso, shopkeepers are boarding up their windows, and what artillery the port has is being primed and prepared. You knew that San Alfonso had cannon defenses. You didn't know quite how large they were. What you'd always taken to be decorative monuments along the port walk have been shifted, opened, or moved to reveal a series of fifty-pound guns. That's in addition to the sixty-four-pound tower gun atop Carolina de la Playa's office, which you know has a 360-degree traverse. She sometimes threatens to use it on brawlers who tumble out of the Lobo Negro and make a ruckus.
  
  You watch her stop one of her clerks from firing at you as you close to the port. The [i]León[/i] has a speaking trumpet, and you raise it to your lips.
  
   calltoaction
if evacuation
  Or, rather, it would be if anyone were paying attention. By the time you reach the docks district of San Alfonso, an organized evacuation effort is underway. Caesar stands next to Carolina de la Playa, directing the efforts of citizens and pirates alike. It looks as though several of the pirate ships have already set off from port, likely not waiting to take passengers, but many are following the instructions of the Capitán de Puerto. Through the spyglass, you notice some money changing hands as her aides count out passenger fares, and you suspect that's part of why everyone here seems to be cooperating so smoothly.
	
  You see the librarian organizing another group of citizens, putting together supplies to head into the jungle. It's almost as if she's had a contingency plan for an interior evacuation for years; you see her looking over her evacuees and directing them almost as though she's organizing the pieces on a chess board. They'll be in good hands if the city falls. Though hopefully it won't come to that.
  
  Not if they listen to you. The [i]León[/i] has a speaking trumpet, and you raise it to your lips.

   calltoaction

  When you reach the docks district, things are going about as normal in San Alfonso, as though the world isn't about to change. Carolina de la Playa is talking with a few of the old-timers outside of her office, watching the ships docks or load cargo in the usual organized chaos.
  
  You're almost sad to be the one to break the news that everything is about to turn ugly. But the [i]León[/i] has a speaking trumpet, and you raise it to your lips, ready to issue the orders that will keep this sort of day the norm for San Alfonso.
  
   calltoaction	
  
 piratekingbounty
 fleet 2
There's no way for you to get back into San Alfonso carrying the body of El Sabio, so you load the deceased Pirate King onto the [i]Galicia[/i]. Both she and the [i]León[/i] are yours now anyway.

 pirateking
  The [i]Galicia[/i] handles like a dream. It's almost as though she responds to you before you've even thought about what you want to do next. You can feel a connection to her, as though she's an extension of your own body, although you could never swim as fast as she speeds through the water. You doubt many ships can match her speed. 
   bounty2

  The [i]Galicia[/i] isn't really meant to be crewed by a single sailor, but she's not too large to manage on your own. You know she'd respond better if you had a small crew, but while it would be handy to have Tinima and Caesar with you, you know very well they wouldn't approve of what you're doing. You do your best with the [i]Galicia[/i] and sail at a leisurely pace toward the Crown Navy.
   bounty2
  
  It doesn't take long—maybe a few hours—before the line of Crown Navy ships appears on the horizon. You hoist a Crown flag, containing your anger at what the [i]Galicia[/i] must have used it for in the past. When you're within hailing range, a lieutenant on the closest sloop, the [i]Isabella[/i], calls to you through a speaking trumpet.
  
  "[i]Galicia[/i]," he says, presumably seeing the ship's name where it's painted on her hull. "This is an official navy action. You are not a navy sloop. State your assignment."
  
  "[i]Isabella[/i]," you call back, "this is Captain ${surname} of ${flagship}. I captured the [i]Galicia[/i] when I killed El Sabio, the Pirate King."
  
  You wait for that to sink in and are gratified that there's an immediate hubbub aboard the [i]Isabella[/i]. "I'd like an escort to the flagship of this fleet," you call after a moment.
  
  The lieutenant, still looking vaguely suspicious of you, gives a curt nod. "We'll guide you in, Captain ${surname}."

  The [i]Rocinante[/i] is captained by Admiral Cervantes, who you know as one of the highest-ranking officials in the Crown Navy. The [i]Rocinante[/i], a two-decker, towers above the [i]Galicia[/i], and you're obliged to be hauled up in a dinghy.
  
    I dump El Sabio's body unceremoniously to the deck.
       ruthless 30
      You hoist El Sabio's body out of the dinghy when you're even with the deck and swing over the rail after him. Admiral Cervantes raises an eyebrow, but waits for you to speak.
       corpse
	  
      "This is the body of El Sabio, the Pirate King," you say. "I hear you're headed to San Alfonso to collect it. I thought I'd save you the trouble."
	  
      There are a few sneers from the sailors aboard, who clearly don't think a privateer should be addressing their admiral so casually, but you're certain you hear a few chuckles as well.
	  
      Cervantes doesn't seem troubled by the lack of formality, and he seems equally untroubled that you're a privateer. "Captain ${moniker}," he says, and again there are rumbles of conversation among the sailors. A midshipman barks a command for silence, and the voices quell, but Cervantes doesn't lift his eyes from you. "I've followed your work for us," he says. "And I hear you were most recently involved in the defeat of the Lusca as well. Presumably, you have a few rewards in store."
      
        "I seek only to serve the Crown."
           greed -50
          Cervantes nods. "As it should be."
           invitation
          He gestures to the helm rising behind you. "You're welcome to watch the action from the bridge, if you'd like."
		  
          "Action?" you ask.
		  
          He nods. "There's still the matter of taking San Alfonso officially for the Crown," he says. "Your fleet will be unmolested, of course."
          
            *selectable_if (patronlie  false) I give information about the port's easiest targets.
               privateer 100
               sabotage
                You've already started to pave the way for the Crown's invasion, and now you'll get to see it firsthand.
              Cervantes is delighted with the additional intelligence. "Commander de Aviles was right to recruit you, ${surname}," he says, clapping you on the shoulder. "We'll put you to good work."
			  
               destroyed
               destroyed true
              And so you have a prime seat to see San Alfonso fall into Crown hands. There is some defensive artillery at the port, of course, but it's no match for a bombardment from the entire Crown fleet. There are flames, of course, and you're sure the rebuilding effort will be dramatic before the Crown can fully settle into running the port again, but the result is clear. San Alfonso is conquered, and no longer belongs to the Pirate King.
               Epilogue
            I convince him to leave San Alfonso as it is to keep the Crown's access to pirate secrets.
               patronlie
                You've taken this lie to work for the Crown as far as it can possibly go, but the destruction of San Alfonso is the limit.
               endif	
			  
              "All you really need is someone you can trust in charge of the place," you say. "Someone who would send the Crown its share of the profits, and who could still keep the Crown abreast of pirate activity." You gesture toward the island. "You don't think you can eliminate piracy all together, do you? Better to have an inside line on the crime and stop the worst of it than to send them all back into hiding, only to reorganize and rise again."
				
              Cervantes looks at you suspiciously. "And I suppose that person would be you, would it?"
              
                 (pirateking) "Who better than the Pirate King?"
                  Explaining what happened with the Pirate King takes some time, but now that El Sabio is dead, the Crown is not in a terrible hurry. You give subtle demonstrations—nothing that would disturb or disrupt the fleet. Since the powers are new, they're a little challenging to control, but you manage to keep it all at a reasonable level.
				  
                  "San Alfonso is used to the rule of the Pirate King," you say. "And now, the Pirate King is me."
                   ((parley > 70) and (fame > 60))
                     governor true
                    Before Cervantes can answer, you press on. "Let me put this power to good use."
                     incharge
                    You straighten your back, every ounce a captain and leader. "With me in charge, you not only have information about the pirates before they strike, but imagine if the Crown is challenged by another ruler." Cervantes, who you suspect had been about to laugh you off, frowns, considering. You jump on that uncertainty. "Imagine if her enemies tried to make grounds here in the Lucayan. If you allow the pirates—some of them—to continue to escape you, if the tide ever turns against the Crown, they could be encouraged by their leader to put their guns against other invaders."
					  
                    Cervantes's pause makes you wonder if you've just hit closer to the mark than you realized. Aside from outlaws and freedom fighters, the Crown has been unchallenged in the Lucayan for years. But there's always the possibility…and every nation has enemies. 
					  
                    "I believe my superiors could be persuaded to see things in that light," he says slowly. "It will be conditional on your continued cooperation, of course."
					  
                    "Of course," you say.
					  
                    And with a few official documents to sign and the knowledge that the Crown will not support you openly if the people of San Alfonso don't accept you in El Sabio's stead, it's done. You are the new leader of San Alfonso.
					  
                    You return to San Alfonso to bear the news.
                    
                      I say El Sabio died to keep the Crown from San Alfonso and left me in charge.
                        You make it a mournful tale: El Sabio trusted you to take him to the Crown ships in order to beg for San Alfonso's safety. There, you watched him bargain away his life on the condition that the port would be left out of the Crown's hands.
						  
                        "I didn't want this responsibility," you say to Carolina de la Playa and the crowd that has grown around you. "But he told me he knew he could make the sacrifice so long as I pledged to take on the mantle of San Alfonso's leader."
                         skeptical
						  
                        Carolina de la Playa looks skeptical at first, but she doesn't challenge you immediately. And so you return to El Sabio's hacienda, where, alone, you slump down in his office chair and breathe a sigh of relief. El Sabio is gone. You are the governor of San Alfonso. And both you and the city will live to fight another day. For today, that is enough.
                         Epilogue
                      I tell them the Crown retreated out of fear of the pirate who slew the Pirate King.
                         ruthless 100
                        You make no apologies; when you return in the [i]Galicia[/i], you make sure everyone sees you aboard the Pirate King's ship. Then you go to the Lobo Negro and make a toast to El Sabio's death.
						
                        The crowd goes silent, which gives you complete control of the floor. You weave a tale of bravery and daring—and through it all, you carry yourself as though you're ready to cut someone through if they interrupt you. Now that El Sabio's dead, who is there to uphold the unwritten rules of San Alfonso?
						
                        You make it clear: the people will answer to you. The Crown fled from your strength, the Pirate King fell to your hand, and now you are the force to be reckoned with in San Alfonso. You slam down your mug on the bar and leave while the silence remains. It will take a few days, you think, but the city will get used to the idea of you being in charge. You storm back to El Sabio's hacienda and start making plans about how to make it your own. But that is work for another day. For today, you've accomplished the impossible.
                         Epilogue
                      I say the Crown will stay out of San Alfonso as long as I keep the peace.
                        You go to Carolina de la Playa's office and weave a tale of woe and daring, of sacrifice and death. The specter of the Crown has always loomed over San Alfonso, but now you paint it hanging over the city like a sword, ready to fall if you aren't respected and listened to.
						
                        "They think they control me," you tell the people. "But we're a free people, aren't we?"
						
                        This gets some cheers from the growing crowd listening to your tale. 

                        "We have to keep the appearances," you tell them. "A little tribute here and there in return for our freedom. Nothing needs to change but the details, my friends."
                         skeptical
                  
                    "Oh, that's exactly why the Crown will never allow it," Cervantes says, interrupting any argument you might make. "The powers you have inherited, shall we say, can't be allowed to maneuver so independently as from a seat of governance." The Admiral shakes his head.
                     sitdownjohn
                    "No," he says. "Make your way up to the helm."
					  
                    There's a subtle gesture, but you see that several of his sailors suddenly look sharper, as though they're prepared for you to fight.
                    
                      And fight I do!
                         privateer -100
                        There's no way you can win, but you can fight to the last. You find that your true allegiance was always to San Alfonso after all, and you won't bow to the Crown and watch her be destroyed. You go after Cervantes first, and you cackle like a mad thing when a pistol shot misses you and plows into one of his lieutenants. Your cutlass flies, and you make a good showing of yourself before you feel something sharp slide through your ribs, and there's pain as your world turns black.
                         captainjones true
                        _scene 9zdeath
                      I allow myself to be led to the helm.
                         destroyed
                       (joaquin1) "What about Joaquin de Aviles?"
                         joaquingov
                      "I think I've proven I can be trusted."
                         use
                         ((parley > 60) and (fame > 60))
                          "Imagine having me at the head of the pirates of San Alfonso, paying you a tribute off of all that wealth," you say before Cervantes can interrupt. "How much does the navy spend in fighting piracy? Imagine taking a cut of that smuggling money without the smugglers ever realizing it."
    					  
                          He scowls and you can tell this wasn't quite the right argument. You quickly change tactics.
                           incharge
                        
                          "Trusted to provide us with intelligence is one thing," says Cervantes. "Trusted to rule? That's entirely something else. You have no pedigree and no standing. The Crown wouldn't allow it."
                           rebuttal
    					  
                          "If you would just…"
    					  
                          Your protest dies off before you can continue when you see that to Cervantes, the matter is closed.
                           sitdownjohn
                "I would accept the responsibility if it were offered."
                   use
                "No. I recommend Joaquin de Aviles."
                   joaquin1 false
                   joaquingov
                  Cervantes looks surprised. "The spy?"
				
                  "He's loyal to the Crown to a fault," you say, and you hear a few sailors chuckle at that. Cervantes continues to watch you guardedly; he, of course, wouldn't imagine loyalty as a potential flaw. "He knows the pirates, and he's known enough among them that something could be drawn up to put him in charge. I'm sure it wouldn't be difficult for your people to manage."
				
                  Cervantes seems to be considering the option, so you press on. "Make him El Sabio's estranged son. Nephew. Few people know much about El Sabio at all, and giving him an heir would be the surest way to press our advantage."
				
                  The Admiral taps his chin with a frown. "They'll still suspect your influence," he says.
				
                  You shrug. "They might, I suppose. Does it matter? You still have your loyal servant in charge of the port with no loss of life, no expense wasted on ammunition and gunpowder, and a potential for greater revenue without disruption of business."
				
                  "Illegal business," Cervantes points out. You shrug. No sense mincing words.
                   parley > 50
                     joaquingovernor true
                    He pinches the bridge of his nose. "Fine. All right. We'll leave San Alfonso as it is, for now, and we'll draft something to elevate Joaquin to the rank of heir."
				  
                    He gives you a look that is clear dismissal. You give him a rakish bow and return to the [i]Galicia[/i]. You take your time making your way back to ${flagship}. The Crown will need time to find Joaquin and install him, so all you have to say is that for now, San Alfonso is safe. 
				  
                    The rest can come tomorrow.
                     Epilogue
                  
                    "He has no pedigree and no standing," Cervantes says finally. "The Crown would never allow it."
                     rebuttal
                "It doesn't matter to me, so long as the city remains."
                   crownreplacement true
                  He smiles, and there's a twinge of what looks like nostalgia—or, more surprising, compassion—in it. "That's a bit soft of you," he says. "And it's not a bad idea, really. Never let it be said that the Crown does not treat the suggestions of her servants with due care and consideration."
				  
                  Cervantes looks a bit wistfully at where San Alfonso lies beyond the horizon. Then he turns to his crew and starts bellowing orders about setting a new course. "You'll be expected to help smooth the way for the Crown's representative," he says to you as an afterthought. "See to it."
				  
                  It's a clear dismissal, and he's not actually looking at you, but you give him a rakish bow and return to the [i]Galicia[/i]. You take your time getting back to ${flagship} and try not to worry overmuch about who the Crown will install to run things. For now, San Alfonso is safe.
				  
                  The rest can come tomorrow.
                   Epilogue
            *selectable_if (pirateking) I suggest he allow me to use the power of the Lucayan to take the city.
               fame 50
               ruthless 100
              Explaining what happened with the Pirate King takes some time, but now that El Sabio is dead, the Crown is not in a terrible hurry. You give subtle demonstrations—nothing that would disturb or disrupt the fleet. Since the powers are new, they're a little challenging to control, but you manage to keep it all at a reasonable level.
			  
              "The Crown can definitely put you to good use, ${surname}," Cervantes says proudly, almost as if he's the one who granted you the powers in the first place. "I think showing San Alfonso how that power will serve the Crown is an excellent idea."

              From the helm, you have a good view of San Alfonso and her defenses once she comes into sight.
               defenses
                You knew that San Alfonso had cannons. You didn't know quite how large they were. What you'd always taken to be decorative monuments along the port walk have been shifted, opened, or moved to reveal a series of fifty-pound guns. That's in addition to the sixty-four-pound tower gun atop Carolina de la Playa's office, which you know has a 360-degree traverse. She sometimes threatens to use it on brawlers who tumble out of the Lobo Negro and make a ruckus.
               panic
                The people of the city are in a panic, running around the docks district like mad chickens. A few are trying to load the city's defensive cannons.
               endif
               tidalwave
				
              But those defenses mean nothing against the power of the Pirate King. You raise a tidal wave, surprised at how easily it builds into an unstoppable force. The water crashes down on San Alfonso, washing away the docks, tearing apart Carolina de la Playa's office, rushing up the main street.
				
              You keep the waters clear of ${favoriteplace}. You find you just don't have the heart to destroy it, even as the rest of the city falls to pieces around it.
				
              When you are finished, you let the waters recede, and you look to Admiral Cervantes for his approval.
			  
              "Very well done," he says quietly, with proper reverence for your abilities. "I think they'll remember."
			  
              Of course they will. You have no doubt that the people who survive in San Alfonso will remember this for a very long time.
               Epilogue
        "The Crown's success is a worthy reward. The bounties are just a perk."
          You hear a snicker among the sailors, but Cervantes doesn't even crack a grin. "We all strive to serve," he says.
           invitation
        "I am always happy to accept the Crown's generosity."
          Cervantes frowns, though you're sure you hear at least one sailor snicker behind him. "She is generous," he says grimly, vexed by your unrepentant grin.
           invitation
    I present El Sabio's body with the respect of a worthy enemy.
       ruthless -30
      You carry El Sabio cradled in your arms. He looks frailer in his death, and his body is a lighter thing than it seems it ought to be, given the importance of his life—and death—to the Lucayan. You lay him gently on the deck and make a gesture over him in benediction. But when you rise, it is clear that you are the one standing, and you show no sign of remorse for your actions.
       corpse
    I present El Sabio's body in a way that emphasizes my own importance.
       ruthless 30
      You sling El Sabio's body over your shoulder like a sailor's bag, and when you put him down on the deck, you put your foot on his chest to make it clear just who triumphed over the Lucayan's infamous Pirate King.
       corpse

 escape
 escape true
 escape2
You return to ${flagship}.
 panic
  Chaos has descended on San Alfonso; the word has gotten out about the Crown's imminent arrival.
You're not surprised to find that some of your crew have vanished.
 crew > 60
  But most are aboard ship, awaiting your return and your orders.
   takeusout

  "Mr. Lord," you say, sounding every inch the captain. "Take us out."
  
  Caesar takes one long look at San Alfonso harbor. "Aye aye, Captain."
  
   destruction
  You and your crew watch at a distance as the Crown Navy sails into San Alfonso harbor. The broadsides are thunderous, and the whole of the Lucayan quivers as they fire.
   pirateking
    You can feel the blows as though you yourself are being attacked. But you know it's only in your claimed cambiar; your body is sound.
  Eventually, the smoke from the fires in the harbor and the gunsmoke from the Crown's cannons all becomes too much. There's nothing left to see here, and the rest of the Lucayan remains open.
  
  "Set a course," you command.
  
  "Aye aye," you hear, and the ship begins to turn.
   Months Later
  

  You'll be shorthanded on your next voyage. But there are other ports and other sailors.
   takeusout

*temp bootytext "none"
*temp fleettext "none"
 moniker  "none"
   moniker surname
*temp crownalfonso false
 (((joaquingovernor) or (governor)) or (crownreplacement))
   crownalfonso true
  
 dead
   wealth "0"
   fleeingfleet

 fleeingfleet
 fleet > 8
   fleettext "Since you became a captain, you've managed to bring together ${fleet} ships under your command, all of them bringing in their share of booty. It's a lot to support, but you're confident that you've got one of the strongest fleets in the Lucayan at your beck and call."
   bootstraps
if fleet > 5
   fleettext "Since you became a captain, you've brought together a fleet of ${fleet} ships, and they follow your orders and split the bounty of their captures. You manage to distribute your support as necessary, and it's not too much to handle. It's a solid, midsized fleet for the Lucayan, and while your enemies might not avoid you on the horizon, they certainly wonder just how many of your ships they'll have to face if they try to take one."
   bootstraps
if fleet > 2
   fleettext "Since you became a captain, you've gained ${fleet} ships under your command. They all do well enough, and it's no trouble to divide your attention between their various needs, splitting your booty to cover whatever costs arise. While the size of your fleet does nothing to intimidate your enemies, you're certainly making more money than you would be with your flagship alone."
   bootstraps

   bootstraps
  
 bootstraps
 wealth > 1000
   bootytext "You're very likely one of the richest pirates in the Lucayan, though pirates rarely give honest estimates of their cash on hand. Still, you've done well, and if you were the treasure-burying sort, you'd be considering where to hide a chest one of these days."
   chapterstart
if wealth > 700
   bootytext "While you're not dripping in gold doubloons, you have a healthy supply of cash on hand: enough to not only support your career, but to live comfortably. It isn't as though you have enough for you to think about burying it any time soon, but you can relax and enjoy a sense of security knowing that if a hurricane took out ${flagship} in the next season, you'd be able to replace her."
   chapterstart
if wealth > 400
   bootytext "You've made enough money to get by over the course of your career, and you have enough in savings to keep you out of trouble should disaster strike. You wouldn't say you're living comfortably—you're still a working captain, as it were—but you do well enough, and there's always the chance that your next mark will be the one that makes you rich."
   chapterstart
if wealth > 50
   bootytext "The best you can say about your finances is that you aren't broke. If disaster strikes, you're going to have a hard time recovering. Still, there's enough doubloons to buy a round at the taberna on occasion, and you're not lacking for the creature comforts you need to get by. But you live in hope that one of your stolen cargoes will bring in a hefty price, or that your next mark will be the one that brings you riches."
   chapterstart

   fleet > 1
     bootytext "The fact is, what money you've made over the years since you became a captain has been spent. You've a little cash on hand, but barely enough to support your crew. Let alone your fleet. But all it will take is one good mark to turn your fortune around. You hope."
     chapterstart
  
     bootytext "The fact is, what money you've made over the years since you became a captain has been spent. You've a little cash on hand, but barely enough to support your crew. But all it will take is one good mark to turn your fortune around. You hope."
     chapterstart

 chapterstart
*image epilogue.png center Epilogue

 marooned
  It takes time—and it's harder now than it was the first time, given the increased presence of the Crown on the Lucayan—but eventually you find another ship. Your friends and lovers from before the mutiny may as well belong to a different life—almost literally. You've had to change your name and your story to avoid capture or worse. But now, once again, things are on the up.
   final

if escape
   joaquinlover
     time
  
     lover "none"
     time
    It takes time—and it's harder now than it was the first time, given the increased presence of the Crown on the Lucayan—but you find a new home port. $!{Flagship} remains under your command, though the crew has changed somewhat. After the destruction of San Alfonso, Caesar Lord and Tinima find they have no stomach for life on your crew. You hear that Anne Read's ship never quite recovered after the battle with the Lusca, and she made an easy picking for the Crown. But life goes on.
     adventure

if dead=false
   adventure
  There is always another adventure off the horizon in the Lucayan. Surely, something great waits for you.
   fame > 60
    After all, you've become a legend.
     fame > 70
      In fact, it's likely you're one of the best-known pirates in all the written history of the Lucayan.
       fame > 80
        And in her storytelling as well, judging by the way your name is spoken.
     endif
	
     ruthless > 65
      The name of Captain ${moniker} is whispered as a threat to children who stay awake too late or disobey their parents. It's used as a curse among sailors. You are feared throughout the Lucayan—and, the way that legends spread, you wouldn't be surprised to hear you've become a specter around the world.
       pirateking
        And now that you are the Pirate King, terror will spread throughout the seas, and your exploits will thrive on that fear.
         ((joaquingovernor) or (crownreplacement))
           visiblethreat
        if ((governor) or (sanalfonsosavior))
          Even those who praise you for keeping San Alfonso out of the Crown's hands wonder at your motives. Do you intend to make it your own pirate haven? Will you bring a rule of terror? They sing cheers to your name, but all of those are tinged with terror. Which is just how you like it.
		  
           ((governor=false) and ((patron) or (patronlie)))
            The Crown was most displeased that one of their primary agents turned out to be a spy for the Pirate King. And if they've gone after your fleet with some vigor since then…you've handled it. After all, there are very few pirates on the Lucayan who would refuse to come to your aid. They all know you. And most fear what might happen if they didn't fall in line.
           love
        if destroyed
          The loss of San Alfonso is a hard one, and you feel it keenly, in a way that you suspect has to do with the power you inherited. There is a gaping hole somewhere in your stomach, you think, or perhaps your left hip. Nothing looks wrong, however, and there's no real damage—only a feeling. Thankfully, there are other ports, and you have hopes that eventually, that hole will find a way to fill.
		  
          Your crew takes the loss hard as well. You try to convince them that there are other ports, but the words ring hollow, especially to Caesar, who had great plans for the city after his pirating days were over. Tinima has even less to say on the matter. You run into Joaquin once in Puerta Ballena, and even he has nothing but grief about San Alfonso's destruction.
  
          Anne Read seems to have vanished into the Lucayan since her home port was destroyed, but you're sure you'll find her again. You're not at all sure she'll be glad to see you.
           final
        
           love
      if (((governor) or (joaquingovernor)) or (crownreplacement))
         visiblethreat
        In San Alfonso, you're a particularly visible threat.
         governor
          You don't rule with an iron fist, but you don't need to. People have a way of whispering about what you've done and wondering aloud whether you're on their side or the Crown's. That fear keeps them from moving against you, and the city runs more smoothly than ever. For now.
           love
        if joaquingovernor
          Joaquin's move into El Sabio's position had people baffled at first, but your willingness to silence those who question him has strengthened his position. There are plenty of whispers about whether you're on the side of the people or the Crown, but no one speaks them while you're around. The fear keeps people from moving against Joaquin, and so far, the city continues to run smoothly.
           love
        
          Francisco Rey, somewhat distantly related to the Crown himself, who supposedly gave up his position to become a pirate (though never a very famous one before now) appeared with riches and offers of friendship in San Alfonso in the weeks following El Sabio's death. He naturally began filling the holes left by El Sabio's absence, and though many were suspicious of his convenient arrival, you've done your share to silence those who question him. There are plenty of whispers about whether you're on the side of the people or the Crown, but no one speaks them while you're around. The fear keeps people from moving against Rey, and so far, the city continues to run smoothly.
           love
      if patron
        Pirates throughout the Lucayan throw themselves overboard when your sails appear on the horizon, trusting that Davy Jones will show them more mercy than you would. And they're right.
         love
      
         beerafter
           quietdrink
        
           love
    
      The name of Captain ${moniker} is sung and cheered, and people lift their mugs to you in taverns throughout the Lucayan.
       ruthless > 50
        Even those who say you're to be feared more than praised repeat your adventures with gusto.
       destroyed
        The destruction of San Alfonso has rocked the Lucayan, and while some say that you were there and saw it happen, others defend you to the end. , your crew among them. You try to convince them that there are other ports, but the words ring hollow, especially to Caesar, who had great plans for the city after his pirating days were over. Tinima has even less to say on the matter. You run into Joaquin once in Puerta Ballena, and even he has nothing but grief about San Alfonso's destruction.
  
        Anne Read seems to have vanished into the Lucayan since her home port was destroyed, but you're sure you'll find her again. You're not at all sure she'll be glad to see you.
         final
      if (((governor) or (joaquingovernor)) or (crownreplacement))
        They say you kept the Crown Navy from invading San Alfonso single-handedly, but there are rumors about how you did it. What did you sacrifice to keep San Alfonso safe?
         governor
          What did you betray for the Crown to allow you to become the city's leader?
           trust
		  
          For the most part, they trust you. And your exploits continue to be the stuff of legend, told over and over again at the Lobo Negro—and far beyond.
           fallen
        if joaquingovernor
          And why do you support Joaquin de Aviles—a pirate, yes, but also obviously a Crown stooge? Still, your support has lent his administration the credibility it needs to keep the island running smoothly. And if the merchants are sending a little more in taxes, and the fees at the docks are a little higher, the people understand that's the price of their freedom.
		  
          That is, if they're truly free.
           trust
        
          And why do you support Francisco Rey, who so conveniently appeared after El Sabio's death? Rey, somewhat distantly related to the Crown himself,  supposedly gave up his position to become a pirate (though never a very famous one before now). In the weeks following El Sabio's death, he appeared in San Alfonso with riches and offers of friendship. He naturally began filling the holes left by El Sabio's absence, and your support has lent his administration the credibility it needs to keep the island running smoothly. And if the merchants are sending a little more in taxes, and the fees at the docks are a little higher, the people understand that's the price of their freedom.
		  
          That is, if they're truly free.
           trust
      if ((pirateking) or (sanalfonsosavior))
        You are, they say, the Savior of San Alfonso, the one without whom the people of San Alfonso could not enjoy their continued freedom from Crown rule.
         ((patron) or (patronlie))
          The Crown was most displeased that one of their primary agents turned out to be a spy for the Pirate King. And if they've gone after your fleet with some vigor since then…you've handled it. After all, there are very few pirates on the Lucayan who would refuse to come to your aid. They all know you.
		  
        As your star grows, so does the legend of San Alfonso.
         fallen
        You suspect that someday, long after the Crown has fallen to another government, long after la Universidad de Cambiar has crumbled and faded into obscurity, the legend of the haven of San Alfonso will live on. And your name will live on with it.
         beerafter
           quietdrink

          In the meantime, El Sabio keeps sending you invitations to meet for a drink. You will accept one of these days, but just as you chased after the truth behind the Pirate King, you'll let him chase after you for a while. Perhaps one day you'll be able to give him an itemized list of changes you'd make.
		  
          But by then, you may have already eclipsed him.
         love
      if patron
        That is, the civilized, honorable people do. The pirates now curse your name, knowing that one of their own has become one of the Crown's most capable and worthy agents. Your letter of marque was well earned, and you are now a free citizen, living the life you chose on the sea and performing admirably as the Crown's premiere pirate hunter.
         love
      
        There are some, however, who whisper that you were there at San Alfonso. That you saw what happened to the port and did nothing. But those are merely rumors, and you haven't confirmed them either way.
         love
  
    You still have a long way to go until you become a legend. Despite all you've accomplished, your name is not yet spoken in fear, or reverence.
	
    But maybe that's for the best.
     patron
      After all, there's a certain value in surprise, and if the pirates you're now hunting down for the Crown, with your freshly minted letter of marque, don't know to flee in fear from you, that makes their capture that much easier.
       work
	  
      Fame will come. For now, the work is the important thing.
       love
    
      After all, you're still sailing under the Crown's nose. Eventually, your deeds will be tallied, and you'll become the legend you deserve to be.
       work


   davyjones
     fame > 60
      Jones's promise bears out. For seven years, you sail under his flag, and for seven years, your ghost ship sends your enemies to their deaths.
       privateer < 50
        Because your favorite targets are Crown vessels, the pirates sing of your ship as a heroic one, devils come to claim the seas back from the Crown that has tainted them with her will. They speak your name in hushed tones, declaring that you stand for freedom. And if you take one of their number every so often, well, they're willing to make up stories about why Captain ${moniker} would do so.
		
        The Crown, when she admits that you exist, fears you exquisitely. It's all you could have hoped for in life, let alone death.
         final
      
        While the Crown is frequently hush-hush about matters such as ghost ships, they've made a saintly tale about fallen angels seeking out retribution against those who question the Crown's authority. Your name has become a heroic one, and you're known among the citizenry as Captain ${moniker}, protector of the innocent. If you happen to take a merchant ship or Crown vessel every now and again, well, everyone is quick to say the ship was on the verge of turning to piracy.
		
        The truth is, you're more successful at hunting pirates as a ghost ship than you were alive, and your name spreads even greater fear. As deaths go, it's better than you expected.
         final
    
      That is, if they could be bothered to remember your name. During life, you never quite made the name for yourself you'd have liked. So you have to be content with your own fame riding on the coattails of Davy Jones. Content, that is, because it's a bit too late to change things.
	  
       evenso
      Even so, as you look back on your life, you know you've made the right decisions.
	
      Or did you?
       enjoy
  
    That is, if they could be bothered to remember your name. During life, you never quite made the name for yourself you'd have liked. Unfortunately, it's a bit late to change things.
     evenso

 love

And what of the rest of your life?
${fleettext} 
 pirateking
  And that's before you became Pirate King. With the Pirate King's ships under your command, it's a whole new ocean.
 endif
${bootytext}

Along the way you've developed friendships, rivalries, alliances, and enemies. And things in the Lucayan are changing quickly.
 piratesfree
  Caesar and Tinima couldn't be more proud to have been part of the crew that saved San Alfonso. In Caesar's case, you see a love for the port city you'd never realized. Whenever you dock, you see him getting further involved in the community, working with the town leaders,
   larksaved
    having many a tea with Evan Lark and 
    discussing business propositions. Eventually, he buys some land on the island.
  
    "Don't tell me this means you're leaving my crew."
       caesar 10
      Caesar laughs. "You'd never manage the books without me," he says. And he's right.
       piratecaesarromanceending
     (hospitalplan  false) "What are you going to do with your land?"
      "I'd like to see San Alfonso have a hospital," he says. "A real one, with doctors trained in continental medicine, but curanderas, too. La Universidad has some medical training, but not enough to really deal with the needs we have in the islands. Not just sickness, but injuries." He glances out at your ship's doctor, who's working on stitching up a gash in the arm of one of your sailors; cuts like that are common enough for sailors who aren't careful, but the stitches often end up looking like they're mended sails. "I just think we can do better for people."
       hospitalhelp
      
        I support Caesar's dream, as long as it doesn't interfere with our piracy.
           caesar 10
          Your life is on the sea, so you can't devote much time to the hospital, but you support Caesar's efforts as much as you can. He seems happy, and remains the consummate first mate.
           piratecaesarromanceending
        I don't interfere, as long as he keeps to his responsibilities on ship.
           nothelping
        I invest money and time into Caesar's dream.
           caesar 20
           greed -10
          Caesar has long supported you; now it's time you give a little back. You set aside coin from your earnings to fund the hospital, and help with plans in whatever way you can. 
           larksaved
            You join Caesar and Evan Lark for tea and scones (which are a reward in and of themselves).
          And when the time comes for the dream to be a reality, you'll be there beside your first mate, acting as his second-in-command.
           piratecaesarromanceending
     (hospitalplan) "Your hospital is finally becoming a reality."
      Caesar looks pleased you remembered. "It is," he says. "It's just the beginning, and it will take years to get everything in order, especially when we're out at sea so often. But it will be worth it."
       hospitalhelp
    I don't interfere, as long as he keeps to his responsibilities on ship.
       nothelping
       caesar -10
      You let Caesar do what Caesar will do. It's none of your concern what he does in port, so long as it doesn't complicate his responsibilities on ship. And thus far, it hasn't; he remains the consummate first mate.
	  
       piratecaesarromanceending
       caesarlover
        You and Caesar are partners, lovers, and confidantes, and when people speak of you, his name is mentioned almost in tandem. It isn't as though you're inseparable; it's that you've come to enjoy each other's company so much that you're each rarely without the other. His skills as a first mate—knowing your commands almost before you speak them—are unparalleled, and those same skills have made him a valuable partner in business as well as other aspects of your life.
		
         piratetinima
      
         piratetinima
        Tinima relishes in how her association with the ships that saved San Alfonso replaces the fear and mistrust that previously met her in port. She starts taking on students when you're in port, and she even asks to go visit her family's village when there's time. 
  
        "There's not much money to be made there," she says, "but I can promise some of the best coconut shrimp in the Lucayan."
        
          "I'd be delighted to visit your village."
             tinima 20
            "You'd get bored in a day or two, but it would give me enough time to beat you at coconut races."
		  
            "Coconut races?"
		  
            She waggles her fingers, mimicking running uphill. "Running up the trees to see who can get a coconut the quickest. All the kids do it. But I was an all-time champion. There's no way you'd win."
		  
            "We'll have to see about that…."
             piratetinimaromanceending
          "I don't think we'll have time; but you can have leave."
             tinima -10
            That clearly wasn't what she had in mind, but she takes it with good grace. She knows her job, and she knows she'll always have a place on your crew. If she takes a leave eventually, you both know she'll come back.
             piratetinimaromanceending
          I make no promises.
             tinima -20
            If the seas take you there, fine, but you've got to keep an eye on your profits. The crew is as close to a family as any of them needs, after all. No sense getting nostalgic.
             piratetinimaromanceending
           (coconutraces) "Of course! You owe me a race!"
             tinima 20
            She grins. "I'll even give you a head start."
			
            "No cambiar," you say, setting the terms, and she puts her hands on her hips.
			
            "What fun would that be?" she teases.
             piratetinimaromanceending
			
             tinimalover
              Tinima glories in her life as your cambiante and as your lover; she has come into her own on the sea, and if other captains fear her abilities, it's to your advantage. She no longer worries how others view her due to your trust in her skills and your confidence in her power. And that trust has extended to her advice and ideas; you turn to her to help solve tricky problems, not only having to do with cambiar, but also with problems among members of your crew. She is an adviser as well as a lover, and you're unsure what you would do without her.
               pirateanne
            
               pirateanne
			  
               pirateking
                Anne has stopped her claims to the title of Pirate King, saying she abdicated to a worthy opponent. You can't quite tell if she means it or if she's saving face.
                 anneequal
                  You never do figure out how to share the magic. But she doesn't hold that against you.
                   annelover
                    Because even without the magic, you never intended to be Pirate King on your own. And if people call you as the Pirate King, she's the Queen. Co-King. Emperor-at-Large? You're still working on the proper titular response for the two of you ruling the seas, but you're sure the writers of the pirate adventure sagas will hammer it out.
		  
                    You both refer to each other as "Your Majesty" in your private moments, and that seems to be working out just fine. Together, you're bringing prosperity to San Alfonso, encouraging free trade and the freedom of ideas to spread throughout the Lucayan. If that means avoiding the Crown's taxes, well, you like to think you're a bit revolutionary. And woe to the Crown Navy ship that seeks to convince you otherwise.
                     joaquinpiratesfree
                  
                     fleetgrow
                
                   annelover
                    She may respect you, and even love you, but you have to wonder if one day you'll wake with her knife in your back. It's possible she loves the title of Pirate King more than she loves you, and you're working, carefully, to keep that from happening. One day, things may end badly for you. But for now, you're making it work, and bringing greater prosperity to San Alfonso. Let the future bring what it will.
                     joaquinpiratesfree
                  
                     fleetgrow
              
                Anne still claims that one day she'll be the Pirate King. She occasionally hounds you to tell her what secrets you know, but you keep her guessing.
                 fleetgrow
                Her fleet continues to grow, and her devotion to San Alfonso never falters. If you're a thorn in the side of the Crown, she's a dagger; but, of course, she plagues plenty of merchant ships as well. You don't think Anne will ever really change, no matter who is in charge of the Lucayan.
                 annelover
                  As for your relationship, you've learned never to assume that anything is permanent with Anne. You laugh together, enjoying conversation and the alliance between your fleets almost as much as you enjoy more private encounters in your cabins. You make a good team, and for now, you're making it work. Let the future bring what it will.

                 joaquinpiratesfree
                As for Joaquin, you're now and forever on opposite sides. His loyalty to the Crown is too strong; when you see him next, it's in Puerta Ballena. He's dressed in continental clothes, rather than as a sailor.
                
                  I avoid him.
                    No sense causing trouble for either of you.
                     final
                  I try to convince him to join my crew.
                    You don't think it's possible, but you have to try. You catch his eye and get him to meet you in a quiet corner of a taberna. You make him the offer. "Think of what we could accomplish in the Lucayan!" you say.
					
                     (joaquin > 65) or ((joaquin > 60) and (joaquinlover))
                      He pauses for so long that you aren't sure he'll answer. He seems to be at war with himself.
					  
                      But in the end, his answer surprises both of you.
					  
                      "All right," he says. "For a time, at least. I want to understand what it is you see in life beyond this." He gestures around you, using Puerta Ballena's taberna to represent all of what he considers the civilized world.
					  
                      "If you come, there might be no turning back," you say, thinking of the ways the Crown treats captured pirates.
			
                      But Joaquin just smiles. "I know how to disappear for a while," he says. "I cannot promise forever, but I'll give this a chance."
                       joaquinlover
                        He reaches across the table and takes your hand in his, and you can see that, more than the life of the pirate, he is giving your relationship together a chance. And you hope that chance is all you'll need to build something together that will last.
                         final
                      
                         final
                    
                      "I cannot," he says, though you can hear some regret. "My life is dedicated to service to the Crown."
		
                      "Then let's at least have a rum for old times," you say.
		
                      And so you do, but it's uncomfortable, and you both know that it's the last time you'll sit at a table together.
                       final
                  I threaten him to leave my fleet alone.
                    You'll be straightforward with him: the Crown needs to stay out of your business. And he can deliver that message. You corner him in an alley outside a taberna.
  		
                    "Make sure your contacts are aware that the seas around San Alfonso are under my protection, for now and always," you say.
  		
                    "They're well aware," he says.
                     ((patron) or (patronlie))
                      "I never thought you'd be a traitor, ${surname}."
                     endif
					
                    And it seems after that, there's nothing left to say.
                     final
if crownalfonso
  Joaquin is terribly proud that you managed to bring San Alfonso under the Crown's control without bloodshed. 
   governor
    Unofficial though that relationship might be, Joaquin considers it a win for civilization.
  "It's practically miraculous," he says. "No one else could have maneuvered it so deftly."
  
   governor
    He's become your most trusted companion in San Alfonso. When you set sail, it's Joaquin who remains behind to mind the affairs of the island. He seems to have developed almost a friendship with Carolina de la Playa, against all odds, and the Capitán de Puerto's respect for your Joaquin transfers to you. Despite her loyalty to El Sabio, she has become one of your allies, and the government you're building is a strong one. 
     joaquinlover
      Strong enough that when one day you no longer feel the call of the sea, you and Joaquin could build a life here, unbothered by the Crown—so long as you continue to make the appropriate tributes.
       crowncaesarending
    
       crowncaesarending
  if joaquingovernor
    He's in more of a state of shock about his new position. "I'm so honored you thought to recommend me for the position," he says, and you can tell he's both grateful and humbled by it. "I never thought I'd have such an opportunity to serve the Crown."
    
      "You deserve it."
         fair
        Of all the people you know, Joaquin is the most loyal to the Crown, but he also has an understanding of and appreciation for life on San Alfonso. If anyone can manage the precarious balance, it's him. And, of course, you'll be around to support him.

         crownjoaquinending
      "I know you will be fair to the people of San Alfonso."
         fair
      "I needed an ally in power."
        He frowns, but whatever your motive, he's determined to do the best job he can for peace in San Alfonso.
         crownjoaquinending
        Joaquin has even developed a friendship with Carolina de la Playa, against all odds, and her alliance has allowed his government to strengthen. Despite her loyalty to El Sabio, she has become one of Joaquin's strongest allies—perhaps because her loyalty is to San Alfonso rather than any particular government.
		
         joaquinlover
          While for a little while you thought his new position might unbalance your relationship, things have settled, and you find that your partnership is stronger than ever. He's well suited to life on land, and you know that whenever you return home to port, you'll have a real home waiting for you. One day when you no longer feel the call of the sea, you know you'll have a place at Joaquin's side.
           crowncaesarending        
        
           crowncaesarending
  
    Joaquin could not be prouder of your work for the Crown; he proclaims to any sailor who will listen that he knew from his first meeting with you that you'd be an asset to the Crown. His own standing in Crown service has risen, as well, and the two of you now work together, doing the Crown's good work by ending the pirate threat to her colonies.
     joaquinlover
      Maybe one day you'll settle down for a life on land and make respectable citizens of yourselves. In the meantime, you live on the border of adventure and civilization, with Joaquin now by your side as part of your crew.
       crowncaesarending
    
       crowncaesarending
	  
      It doesn't come as a surprise that Caesar is angry about the Crown's presence in San Alfonso, but it does surprise you when he asks to buy out of his contract.
      
        "Your contract never had a price." 
          You won't take money from Caesar after all you've been through together. "You've always been free to go."
           caesarcrown2
        "I'll release you for one hundred doubloons."
          It's the price that Blackguard had on your contracts when you first signed up together all those years ago. Caesar hands the money over without hesitation.
           caesarcrown2
		  
          "I wish things had gone differently," he admits, but that doesn't stop him from leaving. You hope the day never comes when you meet up with a pirate ship on which Caesar is the captain.
		  
           crowntinimaending
        "Don't go. I need you."
          Caesar has been an indispensable part of your crew. He keeps the books. He keeps the crew organized. He knows the ins and outs of your entire operation. He's been your friend for longer than anyone else you know.
           caesarlover
            He's been your lover, your confidante, and your partner.
          You don't want to lose him.
           (caesar > 65) or ((caesarlover) and (caesar > 60))

            And it seems that Caesar feels that way, too. "I don't know how I can manage it," he says, frustrated. "I don't trust the Crown. I don't like how they govern. I don't like their laws, and I don't trust their sense of justice." He sighs. "But Davy Jones help me, I trust you."
			
            So Caesar stays aboard, though he can make no promises for the future. All you can do is keep trying to show him why you think the Crown is the future.
             caesarlover
              And why the two of you have a future together.
             crowntinimaending
          
             crowntinimaending
		  
            Tinima is initially furious that San Alfonso is now a colony, but she smothers her anger. Despite her concerns and fears, she decides to stay on with you. You suspect she has some grand scheme involving a tsunami that will one day remove the Crown presence from her beloved islands. You also notice that she stops talking about her home village, and you wonder if you should be watching for your bed to dry out and collapse in the middle of the night.
            
              As long as it doesn't interfere with her work, I don't care.
                You keep a weather eye on her, but though you may one day have to face her as an enemy, for now she's still your cambiante, and doing a fine job.
                 annecrownending
              She's a liability. I replace her as cambiante.
                You can't spend your whole life looking over your shoulder, waiting for your cambiante to turn against you. Eventually, you tell her that her services are no longer required and leave her in a Crown-friendly port. She rages against you, but there's little enough she can do.
			  
                If you see her again, it won't be as an ally, but an enemy.
                 annecrownending
              I try to convince her that the Crown can benefit the islands.
                It's an old argument, and one you're sure you'll have again and again.
			  
                "You won't convince me," she says one afternoon while you're on deck together. "Some things don't change."
			  
                "And other things change all the time," you remind her, gesturing to the calm waters around you. "You're an expert at change, Tinima. You should know."
			  
                 (tinima > 65) or ((tinimalover) and (tinima > 60))
                  She bites her lip, not wanting to admit your point. "It will never be easy for me to see your point of view," she says. "But I will try."
				
                   tinimalover
                    You place your hand over hers, and she squeezes it in return.
                  "That's all I can ask," you say.
                   annecrownending
                
                   annecrownending
				
                  Anne's outrage over your alliance with the Crown is fierce. You've tried to tell her that it was the only way to keep San Alfonso free, but she sneers at the notion that any agreement with the Crown is true freedom. Even if the Crown should rule all the seas, she would still declare her allegiance with the Pirate King—or claim that she is the rightful heir. Which, effectively, she is; there is no one else in all the Lucayan who can challenge her.
   
                  Except, perhaps, you.
                  
                  That possibility is tested once when you sight her flagship, the [i]Bonney Lass[/i], sailing on her own one clear day at sea.
                  
                    I go after Anne's ship for the bounty.
                      You chase down her ship, cannons blazing. She changes course to meet you. This is the day when you will meet your destiny.
                       pistols > 65
                        Your crew perform their best; taking down Anne Read will mean their names go down among the best pirate-hunting crews of all time. And though your losses are heavy, and blood runs slick across the decks of ${flagship} and the [i]Bonney Lass[/i], it's you who triumph.
					  
                        It's also you who ends up with your sword to Anne's throat.
                        
                          I allow her to surrender.
                            She'll face the Crown's justice, like any other pirate. But at least you won't be the one to run her through.
						  
                            Anne doesn't appreciate the sentiment. She spits in your face over your blade.
						  
                            "Davy Jones take you!" she screams as your crew takes her below.
						  
                            Months later, you hear she pleaded her belly. You never discover if she eventually hanged or if she made a daring escape. But some nights you wake up, and in the shadows, you half expect to see her there, waiting to deliver a killing blow.
                             final
                          I end her.
                            She spits in your face. You slit her throat. When she topples to the deck, lifeless, you stare down at the woman who would have been Pirate King. You know that the Crown's waters are safer now that she's gone.
                             final
                          I show mercy at the last moment.
                            When it comes down to it, you can't do it. She won't forgive you, you know. You can tell by how she spits in your face, and by how she curses you when you leave her marooned on an island close enough to the trade routes that you know someone will pick her up.
						  
                            "You will die at the end of my blade!" she screams.
						  
                            And perhaps some day you will.
                             final
                      
                        Your crew fight their best, but they're no match for the ruthlessness of Anne's sailors. They're armed to the teeth and fighting for their lives—and their way of life. Your crew never stood a chance.
					  
                        And it's Anne whose blade ends at your throat.
					  
                         annefavor
                          "You promised me a favor once," you say over the blade. "I am calling it now. Release me and my crew," you say.
                         endif
						
                        She glares at you over her cutlass. It's a long moment before she decides.
					  
                        "Let ${pronounhim} go," she says. "And what's left of the crew. I think we've made our point."
					  
                        She shoves you away onto your deck. "Next time, you won't be so lucky," she snarls.
					  
                        You decide to make sure there will never be a next time.
                         final
                    I hail her, hoping to talk.
                      There might be a chance to bring her around to your side. She's always hunted Crown ships, but if you could convince her to hunt pirates instead…
					
                      A warning shot fires as you approach. "I just want to talk!" you call into your speaking trumpet.
					
                      "We have nothing to discuss!" she shouts back.

                      "Just give me a chance!"

                       ((anneread > 65) or (annelover))
                        It's a long silence after your words, and you wonder if she's preparing some particularly awful cannon fire while you wait. But instead, she shouts back. "Get in a dinghy and meet me."
					  
                        Her crew lowers her over in a dinghy, and you hurry to put yourself in one, despite protests from your crew that it's sure to be a trap. When you meet her in the middle, the two of you great captains in rowboats, it's almost ridiculous.
					  
                        "I can't believe I'm doing this," she says. "But I've decided to give you a chance."
					  
                        You can't believe what you're hearing. "What?"
					  
                        She rolls her eyes. "One year, ${surname}. You get one year of my fleet. And then I'll decide whether we part as friends or enemies."
					  
                         annelover
                          She reaches over and pulls you close, drawing you into a kiss that raises cheers from both ships. When she releases you, you sink back into your dinghy, breathless.
                         endif
						
                        "One year," you promise. It will have to be enough.
                         final
                      
                        The answering fire from her ship is a clear enough response that you don't bother trying again. You sail off, and she doesn't pursue, but you know the next time won't go the same way. You're now enemies, and when you face her again, only one of you will survive.
                         final
					
                    I sail away.
                      You may have to meet one day as enemies, but it won't be today.
                       final


  The destruction of San Alfonso has hit everyone hard, your crew among them. You try to convince them that there are other ports, but the words ring hollow, especially to Caesar, who had great plans for the city after his pirating days were over. Tinima has even less to say on the matter. You run into Joaquin once in Puerta Ballena, and even he has nothing but grief about San Alfonso's destruction.
  
  Anne Read seems to have vanished into the Lucayan since her home port was destroyed, but you're sure you'll find her again. You're not at all sure she'll be glad to see you.
   final

 final
For now, there's little else to tell. You and your ship may as well live and breathe together. She's your first thought in the morning and your last thought at night. Some may say you work too hard, but to you, it's not work. Your ship, and life on the Lucayan, riding the winds and waves, are your world. And for now, you're content.

And so you sail, the waves beneath your hull, the winds in your sails, the music of the islands drifting across your deck. You wouldn't have it any other way.

Would you?
 End

 enjoy
 End
We hope you've enjoyed playing [i]Choice of the Pirate.[/i]

*feedback

Choice of Games releases new games like this one on a regular basis.
*subscribe


Thanks for playing!

*ending

*hide_reuse
*image epilogue.png center Epilogue

 captainjones
  
  When you open your eyes, you're somewhat surprised you still have them. You were fairly certain you were dead.
  
  Then you see the figure looming above you and dread smacks straight into your no-longer-beating heart. Oh, he looks unassuming enough: weatherbeaten face, nut brown skin, and—flat on your back though you are—you can see that his jacket and waistcoat are fashionable. It's the eyes, though, that give him away. Gray and deep, they swirl like storm clouds.
  
  You say it anyway: "Who are you?"
  
  The man—though you don't think he's truly human—laughs and offers you a hand. "I have gone by many names," he says, pulling you to your feet. You're surprised to see that you're on ${flagship}, and that she's seen very little damage. "Some say I work for the storm goddess Guabancex. Others that I am the guide to Maketaori Guayaba's deathly realm. Some curse me for a devil, others laud me as the son of an old sea god. I am a serpent or a storm or a swift blow to a sailor's heart." His grin flashes like lightning. "You may call me Jones if you like."
  
  And there it is. You're definitely dead. You take long enough to respond to Jones's pronouncement that he clears his throat. "Usually I get a better response than that."
  
  "Should I bow?" you ask, and your voice comes out curiously flat.
  
  He decides to take it as a joke. "Not necessary. I've come to offer you a second chance at being a legend," he says. "I find that the Lucayan is short one ghost ship lately, and I'm in the market for another. Serve me seven years, and your name will live on long after your final rest."
   servingdavyjones
  
    *hide_reuse "I'm already a legend."
       fame > 70
        Jones laughs, a rumble of thunder and a crash of waves together. "So you are. But you could be a bigger one."
         servingdavyjones
      
        "Are you now?" Jones asks, and his eyes are as piercing as a whaler's harpoon. "I think you'll find that whatever notoriety you've gained in life will fade quickly enough. But in my service, well…" He spreads his arm in a gesture of calm waters and deserted beaches and possibility. "You should consider my offer."
         servingdavyjones
    *hide_reuse "What service do you require?"
      "You'd be free of curses, and know your own mind," he promises. "And as such, it's largely your own decision. You'd pick up the lost souls from the sea, become their captain. You could strike fear or mercy into the hearts of pirates and sailors as you choose. You could be a rescuer or a villain, luring Crown ships or pirates to their deaths in strange waters or steering them clear of obstacles." He shrugs. "It's all the same to me, so long as there are souls to be collected and guided. I've been told I'm fickle."
       servingdavyjones
    "Very well. Seven years of service."
       davyjones true
      A contract appears before you, much like the very first contract you signed as a lowly sailor. The terms are loose: seven years of service, but that service is undefined. There is no discussion of payment.
						
      A quill appears next to the contract, and you sign, ink the color of blood pressing from the quill into the scroll. The scroll snaps back into a roll as you finalize your mark, and the quill, contract, and storm all disappear in a moment. You have the sense that time has passed; certainly, your crew are no longer in their lifeboats around the ship.
						
      Jones taps the rolled-up contract against his palm. "I'll be seeing you," he promises.
						
      "But what do I do now?" you ask.
						
      He gestures with the contract out at the open sea. "Sail, Captain. And see what the future brings. No matter who rules these waters among mortals, the true rulers remain, and you serve them now."
       deaths
    "I'll not be a servant or a ghost. Bring me death."
      The figure dons his hat again. "By all means," he says, "you're welcome to it."
					
      And then, darkness swallows you again. It feels rather more final this time.
						
       deaths


   deaths

  
 deaths
 dead true
So ends your life as a pirate. But the greater question is, will you live on in legend?

 heroicdeath
  You were the stuff of legend up until the last, and your death is not one that others will look on as a lesson, but as a noble sacrifice.
  _scene 9xending
if warningdeath
  You know that your death could be used as a lesson—a warning—for those who might find themselves in similar situations, with the risk of death at sea looming over them.
  _scene 9xending

  You know your life is the stuff of stories that should be told by pirates across the Lucayan again and again.
  _scene 9xending

BENEATH Gibraltar’s towering and craggy protection, the mixed collection of anchored shipping tugged at their cables and waited for the sudden squall to abate. Despite streaks of pale blue which showed themselves occasionally between the brisk clouds, the air was cold, with a bite in it more common in the Bay of Biscay than the Mediterranean. Considering its strategic importance, Gibraltar’s anchorage was unusually deserted. A few storeships, some brigs and schooners finding shelter or awaiting orders made up the bulk of vessels there, and of major men-of-war there were but three. Anchored well apart from the other hotch-potch of local craft were three ships of the line, seventy-fours, which in this month of January 1798 were still the most popular, and the most adaptable, vessels in any plan of battle. The one anchored nearest to the land bore the name Lysander across her broad counter, a name to match the figurehead which stared angrily from beneath her bowsprit. It was a fine figurehead, with the black-bearded Spartan general adorned in crested helmet and breastplate, originally carved by Henry Callaway of Deptford. Like the rest of the big two-decker, it was well painted, with a look of newness which belied the ship’s eleven long years in the King’s service. Back and forth, up and down her wide quarterdeck her captain, Thomas Herrick, walked with barely a pause to peer towards the shore. If he considered his ship’s appearance and condition, it was more from anxiety than pride. The months of work in England to get Lysander ready for sea, the whole wearing business of re-commissioning and gathering what amounted to practically a raw company had gone on without a pause. Stores and powder, water and provisions, weapons and the men to handle them. Herrick had more than once questioned the fates which had given him his new command. And yet, despite the delays and infuriating slackness amongst dockyard men and chandlers, he had seen his ship grow from a disorganised chaos to a living, vital creature. Frightened men brought aboard by the unrelenting press-gangs, and others gathered by motives as varied as patriotism or merely fleeing into the Navy to avoid a hangman’s halter, had been slowly and painstakingly moulded into something which, if still far from perfect, could offer hope for the future. The first squall in the Bay as Lysander had crawled south towards Portugal had brought some weakness to light. Too many seasoned hands in one watch, too many landsmen in another. But under Herrick’s careful watch, and the efforts of Lysander’s remaining backbone of professional warrant officers, they had at least come to terms with the awesome maze of rigging, the rebellious and treacherous folds of canvas which made up their daily lives at sea. Once at anchor below the Rock, Herrick had waited with growing apprehension for this particular day. More ships had arrived and anchored nearby. The other two seventy-fours, Osiris and Nicator, the frigate Buzzard and the little sloop of war Harebell were no longer separate entities but part of a whole. By order of the Admiralty in London they had become one. The squadron, in which Herrick’s ship would hoist the broad pendant of commodore, and over which and through all imaginable circumstances Richard Bolitho would at any moment now be exercising his right of command. It was strange when Herrick hesitated to consider the matter. It was only four months since he and Bolitho had returned to England from this same sea. After a bloody battle in which Herrick’s own ship had been destroyed and a complete French squadron routed or taken, they had gone to the Admiralty together. It still seemed like a dream, a memory of long past. The result of that visit had been far-reaching. For Richard Bolitho an immediate promotion to commodore, and for Herrick the post of flag captain. Their admiral had been less fortunate. Packed off to govern a penal colony in New South Wales, the very swiftness of his fall from grace had somehow measured the step between authority and oblivion. Herrick’s first overwhelming pleasure of being appointed flag captain to Bolitho had been slightly marred by another of the Admiralty’s changes of heart. Instead of Bolitho’s own ship, Euryalus, the great one hundred gun three-decker which he had originally seized as a prize from the French, they had been given the Lysander. Easier to handle than a great first-rate, possibly, but Herrick suspected that another officer more senior than Bolitho had claimed the ex-Frenchman for himself. He paused in his pacing and ran his eyes along the busy decks. Seamen were working on the gangways and boat tier. Others swayed high overhead amongst the black criss-cross of shrouds and stays, halliards and braces, making sure that no frayed lines, no broken wisps of hemp would greet the new commodore as he stepped through the entry port. The marines were already in position. No need to worry about their Major Leroux. He was speaking with his lieutenant, a rather vacant young man called Nepean, while a sergeant checked each marine’s musket and appearance. The midshipman of the watch must have an aching arm, Herrick thought. He was very conscious of his captain’s presence, and was holding a heavy telescope to his eye, obeying the last order, to report immediately when the commodore’s boat shoved off from the jetty. Herrick shifted his gaze outboard towards the other vessels of the small squadron. He had had little to do with them so far, but already knew quite a lot about their various captains. From the little sloop which regularly bared her copper as she rolled uncomfortably in the squall to the nearest two-decker, Osiris, they all seemed to have some sort of link. Nicator’s captain, for instance. Herrick had discovered that he had served with Bolitho during the American Revolution when they had both been lieutenants. Their reunion might present pleasure or otherwise, he thought. Commander Inch of the dizzily swaying Harebell had commanded a bomb vessel with the old squadron, here in the Mediterranean. Of Buzzard’s captain, Raymond Javal, he had learned little but gossip. Hasty temper. Hungry for prize money. He had all the makings of a typical if awkward frigate captain. He let his gaze rest on the Osiris once again and tried to conceal his irritation. She was almost a twin to the Lysander and her destiny was firmly in the hands of Captain Charles Farquhar. All those years ago. It was like another fate which had somehow drawn them together once more, to serve under the same Richard Bolitho. Then it had been in the frigate Phalarope in the West Indies during the Americans’ fight for independence. Bolitho had been her captain, Herrick his first lieutenant and Farquhar one of the midshipmen. Arrogant, high-born, Farquhar never failed to prick Herrick’s resentment. Even looking at his Osiris did nothing to help. Her ornate gingerbread and other carving at poop and beakhead displayed a lavish use of real gilt paint as an outward sign of her captain’s status and prosperity. So far they had avoided meeting each other, except when Farquhar had reported his arrival at Gibraltar. Any sort of fresh beginning had faded as Farquhar had drawled, “I say, you don’t seem to have spent much on the old ship, eh?” That same maddening smile. “Our new lord and master won’t like that, y’know!” Suddenly, the lower line of black gunports opened along Osiris’s sloping side, and with perfect precision the whole battery of thirty-two-pounders trundled into the weak sunlight. As one. Something like panic ran through Herrick’s mind. Farquhar would never allow his ambitious brain to be fogged by some stupid memory or dislike. He had kept his eye on what mattered most to him. Which at this particular minute was to impress the commodore. It happened to be Richard Bolitho, a man more dear to Herrick than any other living being. But if it had been Satan himself Farquhar would have been ready. As if to make the final stab the midshipman of the watch shouted excitedly, “Barge shoving off from the jetty, sir!” Herrick licked his lips. They felt like dry ashes. “Very well, Mr. Saxby. My compliments to the first lieutenant. He may muster the hands now.” Richard Bolitho walked to the quarter windows of the broad cabin and looked towards the other ships. Despite the importance of the moment, the solemnity of being received aboard his own flagship for the first time in his life, he could not contain his excitement. It was like wine and laughter all bubbling up inside him, held in check by some last reserve. He turned and saw Herrick watching him from beside the screen door. Some seamen were carefully arranging chests and boxes which had been swayed up from the barge, and he could hear his coxswain, Allday, bawling angrily at someone to take care. “Well, Thomas, that was a fine welcome.” He strode across the deck with its neat covering of black and white chequered canvas and took Herrick’s hand. Overhead he could hear the thump of boots as the marine guard departed, the returning familiar sounds of normal routine. Herrick smiled awkwardly. “Thank you, sir.” He gestured at the baggage. “I hope you’ve brought all you need. It seems we may be a while from home.” Bolitho studied him gravely. Herrick’s stocky figure, his round, homely face and those bright blue eyes were almost as familiar as Allday’s. But he seemed different somehow. It was only four months, and yet . . . He thought of all that had happened since that visit to the Admiralty. The discussions with men so senior and powerful that he still could not grasp that promotion could mean so much. Whenever he had mentioned his anxiety over the progress being made with his new flagship he had seen that amused look in their eyes. The admiral who had given him his appointment, Sir George Beauchamp, had put it into words. “You’ll have to
 forget that sort of thing now, Bolitho. The captain must deal with the running of a ship. Yours is a more exacting task.” Eventually he had taken passage to Gibraltar in a fast frigate, pausing in the Tagus with despatches for the flagship of the fleet employed on blockade duty. There he had been given an audience with the admiral, the Earl of St. Vincent, so titled because of his great victory eleven months back. The admiral, still affectionately known as “Old Jarvy” by many of his subordinates, but only when he was well out of earshot, had greeted him briskly. “You’ve got your orders. See you carry ’em out. It’s been months since we knew what the French were up to. Our spies in the channel ports reported that Bonaparte visited the coast many times to lay plans for invading England.” He had given his dry chuckle. “I think my medicine off Cape St. Vincent taught ’em to tread warily where the sea is concerned. Bonaparte is a land animal. A planner. Unfortunately, we have nobody to match him yet. Not on land, that is.” Looking back it was hard to measure how much the admiral had managed to explain and describe in that brief interview. He had been on active duty with hardly a break, and yet he had been able to sum up the situation in home waters and the Mediterranean better than any Admiralty official. The admiral had walked with him to his quarterdeck and had said quietly, “Beauchamp is the man to plan this sort of mission. But it needs seagoing officers to push those ideas to reality. Your squadron’s efforts last year in the Mediterranean told us a great deal about French intentions. Your admiral, Broughton, did not perhaps understand their true significance until it was all too late. For him, that is.” He had given Bolitho a grim stare. “We must know the worth of putting a fleet into these waters again. If we divide our squadrons for a bad purpose, the French will soon explore our weakness. But your orders will tell you what you must do. Only you can decide how you are going to do it.” Again that dry chuckle. “I wanted Nelson for the task, but he is still sorely weakened by the loss of his arm. Beauchamp chose you for this tickle at Bonaparte’s underbelly. I hope for all our sakes it was a wise choice.” And now, after all the discussions, the searching through reports to discover the value of countless ideas of the enemy’s motives and objectives, he was here in his own flagship. Beyond the thick glass windows were other ships, all linked by the dovetailed broad pendant which had broken at the masthead as he had climbed aboard to the slap of muskets and the din of fifes and drums. And he still could not believe it. He felt the same as before. As eager to get to sea as he had been in the past whenever he had joined a new ship. But the difference would soon display itself in all manner of ways. When Herrick had been his first lieutenant he had stood between his captain and company. The link and the barrier. Now Herrick, as flag captain, would stand between him and his other officers, his little squadron and every man-jack aboard each individual ship. Five vessels in all, way over two thousand souls divided amongst them. It was that kind of assessment which brought home the reality of his command. He asked, “How is young Adam? I did not see him when I came aboard.” As he said it he saw the stiffness come to Herrick’s face. “I was about to tell you, sir. He is with the surgeon.” He looked at the deck. “A slight accident, but, thank God, no real harm done.” Bolitho replied, “The truth, Thomas. Is my nephew ill?” Herrick looked up, his blue eyes suddenly angry. “A stupid argument with his opposite number in the Osiris, sir. Her sixth lieutenant gave some sort of insult. They went ashore on their separate duties but arranged to meet and settle the matter.” Bolitho made himself walk slowly to the stern windows and stare down at the swirling water around the rudder. “A duel?” Just the sound of the word made him feel sick. Despairing. Like father like son? It was not possible. “High spirits more like.” Herrick sounded unconvinced. “Neither was badly hurt, though I gather Adam nicked the other fellow the worse.” Bolitho turned and regarded him calmly. “I will see him directly.” Herrick swallowed. “With your permission, sir, I should like to deal with the matter myself.” Bolitho nodded slowly, feeling a great gap yawning between him and his friend. He said quietly, “Of course, Thomas. Adam Pascoe is my nephew. But he is one of your officers now.” Herrick tried to relax. “I am deeply sorry to trouble you in your first hour, sir. Not for the whole world would I wish that.” “I know.” He smiled gravely. “It was foolish of me to interfere. I was a flag captain and often resented my superior’s hand in my own affairs.” Herrick looked around the big cabin, eager to change the subject. “I hope everything is to your liking, sir. Your servant is preparing a meal, and I have had some hands detailed to stow your chests for you.” “Thank you. It seems most satisfactory.” He stopped. It was happening again. The formal tones. The offering and an acceptance. When they had always been used to sharing. Understanding. Herrick asked suddenly, “Will we be putting to sea soon, sir?” “Aye, Thomas. Tomorrow forenoon if the wind stays favourable.” He pulled the watch from his pocket and snapped open the guard. “I would wish to see my officers—” He faltered. Even that was changed. He added, “To see the other captains as soon as is convenient. I received some more despatches from the governor here, but after I have read them I should like to tell the squadron what we are about.” He smiled. “Don’t look so troubled, Thomas. It is as hard for me as for you.” For a brief moment Bolitho saw the old light in Herrick’s eyes. The warmth and trust which could so easily turn to hurt. Herrick replied, “I feel like an old foot in a new shoe.” He smiled, too. “I’ll not let you down.” He turned and left the cabin, and after a discreet pause Allday and two seamen carrying a large case strode through the door. Allday glanced swiftly round the cabin and seemed to approve. Bolitho relaxed very slowly. Allday was always the same, and for that he was suddenly grateful. Even his new blue jacket with the large gilt buttons, the nankeen trousers and buckled shoes which Bolitho had purchased for him to reveal his new status as a commodore’s own coxswain did little to hide his thickset, rugged individuality. Bolitho unfastened his sword and gave it to him. “Well, Allday, what do you make of her, eh?” The man eyed him calmly. “A well-found ship,” he hesitated over the word, “sir”. Even Allday had been made to alter his ways. Never in the past had he called him anything but “Captain.” It was their own unrehearsed arrangement. The new rank had changed that, too. Allday read his thoughts and grinned ruefully. “Sorry about that, sir.” He glared at the two seamen who were watching them curiously, the case balanced between them. “But I can wait. It’ll be Sir Richard afore long, and that’s no error!” Allday waited until the seamen had gone and said quietly, “I reckon you’d like to be left alone now, sir. I’ll see that your servant is warned about your customs.” Bolitho nodded. “You know me too well.” Allday closed the door behind him and glanced coldly at the ramrod-stiff marine sentry outside the cabin. To himself he murmured, “Better’n you’ll ever know.” On the quarterdeck once more, Herrick walked slowly to the nettings and stared at the other ships. It had been a bad beginning. For both of them. Perhaps it was all in his own mind, like his dislike for Farquhar. The latter obviously did not give a damn for him, so why should he get so easily ruffled? Bolitho had looked exactly as he had known he would. The same gravity which could alter in an instant to a youthful exuberance. His hair as black as ever, his slim figure no different, apart from the obvious stiffness in his right shoulder. He counted the months, nearly seven now, since Bolitho had been marked down by a musket ball. The lines at the corners of his mouth were a little deeper. Pain, responsibility? Parts of each, he decided. He saw the officer of the watch eyeing him cautiously and called, “We will signal the squadron, Mr Kipling. All captains repair on board when I so order.” He pictured them putting on their best uniforms. Inch in his tiny cabin, Farquhar in his lavish quarters. But each and all would be wondering, as he was. Where bound? What to expect? The price for both. Alone in his cabin Bolitho heard feet thudding along the deck overhead, and after a momentary hesitation threw off his dress coat with its solitary gold stripe and seated himself at his desk. He slit open the large envelope but still hesitated over reading the neatly written despatches. He kept seeing Herrick’s anxious face. They were almost the same age, and yet Herrick seemed to have grown much older, his brown hair marked here and there like hoar frost. It was hard not to see him as his best friend. He had to think of him as a strength, the flag captain of a squadron which had never acted as a single unit before. A rough task for any man and for Thomas Herrick . . . he tried to hold back the sudden doubts. Herrick’s poor beginnings, the son of a clerk, his very honesty which had marked him as a man who could be trusted under any known circumstances, could hinder his overall judgement. Herrick was a man who would obey any lawful order without question, with no consideration for his own life or ruin. But to assume control of the squadron if its commodore should die in battle? It was strange to realise that Lysander’s original master had fallen at St. Vincent. Her commodore, George Twyford, had been killed in the first broadsides, and her captain, John Dyke, was even now enduring a living hell in the naval hospital at Haslar, too cruelly maimed even
 to feed himself. The same ship had survived them and many more. He looked around the neat cabin with its well-carved chairs and dark mahogany table. He could almost feel them watching him. He sighed and began to read the despatches. Bolitho nodded to the five officers who stood around the cabin table and said, “Please be seated, gentlemen.” He watched them as they eased their chairs towards him, their mixed expressions of pleasure, excitement and curiosity. It was a very special moment, and he guessed they were all sharing it with him, if for varied reasons. Farquhar had not changed. Slim and elegant, with the self-assurance he had carried even as a midshipman. Now a post-captain of thirty-two, his ambition shone in his eyes to match his gleaming epaulettes. Francis Inch, bobbing and horse-faced, could barely restrain his beam of welcome. As commander of the sloop he would be vital for inshore work and sweeping ahead of the squadron. Raymond Javal, the frigate’s captain, looked more like a Frenchman than an English sea officer. Very dark and swarthy, with thick greasy hair, he had features so narrow that his deepset eyes seemed to dominate his whole appearance. He looked at captain George Probyn of the Nicator and gave a brief smile. They had served together in the old Trojan when the American Revolution had erupted to change the face of the world. Yet it was almost impossible to see him in those times. He sat hunched against the table like a large, shabby innkeeper. A year or so older than Bolitho, he had left the Trojan in much the same manner as himself. To take command of a captured blockade runner and sail her to the nearest friendly port. Unlike Bolitho, however, whose chance had led directly to his first command, Probyn had been captured by an American privateer and had fretted out most of the war as a prisoner until an exchange had been made with a French officer. Those vital years in his early service had obviously cost him dearly. He looked uneasy, with a sly, darting way of examining his fellow captains and then looking down into his clasped hands. Herrick said formally, “All present, sir.” Bolitho looked at the table. In his mind’s eye he was seeing his written orders. You are herby authorised and directed to proceed with your squadron to ascertain by every means in your power the presence and destination of considerable armaments . . . He began quietly, “As you will know, the enemy has spent much time in seeking out some flaw in our defences. Apart from our successes at sea, we have been able to do little to stop the spread of French progress and influence. In my view, Bonaparte has never changed from his original tack, which was and still must be to reach India and seize our trade routes. The French admiral, Suffren, almost succeeded during the last war.” He saw Herrick’s eyes flicker towards him, no doubt remembering when they had sailed together in the East Indies, seeing for themselves the determination of their old enemy to regain ground lost in that uneasy peace. “Today Bonaparte must know that any delay in his preparations can only give us time to gain strength.” They all looked round as Inch exclaimed cheerfully. “We’ll show them, sir!” He grinned at the others. “Like we did before!” Bolitho smiled. Glad that Inch, if ignorant of the facts, had not changed. Thankful that his excited comment had broken some of the distance between himself and the others. “Thank you, Commander Inch. Your optimism does you credit.” Inch bobbed and flushed with pleasure. “However, we have no real intelligence of which way the French will move first. The bulk of our fleet is operating from the Tagus, to keep a wedge between the French and their Spanish allies. But the enemy may attack Portugal because of our presence there, or indeed he may attempt to invade Ireland again.” He could not conceal his bitterness. “As they intended when our own Navy was beset with misfortune which broke last year in the great mutinies at the Nore and Spithead.” Farquhar looked at his cuff. “Should have hanged a thousand of the devils, not a mere handful!” Bolitho eyed him coldly. “Perhaps if a little more thought had been given to our sailors’ wants in the first place, no punishment would have been needed at all!” Farquhar smiled up at him. “I take the point, sir.” Bolitho looked at his scattered papers, giving himself time. He had risen too easily to Farquhar’s intolerance. He continued, “Our duty will be first to examine the progress of French preparations in the Gulf of Lions. At Toulon, Marseilles and any other port about which we can discover enemy activity.” He looked at each of them gravely. “Our fleet is stretched to the limit. We cannot afford to allow the enemy to scatter it to the extent it can be devoured piece by piece. Likewise, we must not have a large fleet at one end of the ocean while the enemy is at the other. Seek, find and bring ’em to battle, it is the only way!” Javal said harshly, “And mine is the only frigate, sir.” “Is that an observation or a complaint?” Javal shrugged. “A malady, sir.” Probyn darted him a quick glance. “It is a vast responsibility.” He looked at Farquhar. “If we meet with superior forces we will be without support.” Farquhar eyed him coolly. “But at least we will know they are nearby, my dear George!” Herrick said, “It is a serious matter!” “Apparently.” Farquhar’s eyes flashed. “So let us tackle it seriously.” Bolitho made them all turn towards him. “One thing is certain. We must work together. I do not care what you may think of the value of these orders. We must interpret them into deeds. Drive them to a rightful and profitable end.” Farquhar nodded. “I agree, sir.” The others remained silent. “Now, if you will return to your commands and relay my wishes to your people, I will be pleased to have you aboard to dine with me tonight.” They all stood up, already planning how they would rephrase his words to their own subordinates. Like Bolitho, each one of them, except Inch, would probably wish to be alone in his own ship to prepare himself and his ideas for whatever lay ahead. But they would have little enough time together, Bolitho thought. He needed to know each of them better, just as when a signal broke from Lysander’s yards his captains would read the mind of the man who made it. One by one they made their farewells. Probyn was the last to leave, as Bolitho knew he would. He said awkwardly, “Good to see you again, sir. They were great times we once shared. I always knew you would be successful, famous even.” His eyes moved hurriedly round the cabin. “I have been less fortunate. Through no fault of mine. But without influence . . .” He did not finish it. Bolitho smiled. “It makes my appointment all the easier to have old friends in company.” The door closed and he walked slowly to the heavy mahogany wine cabinet which he had brought from London. It was beautifully worked, every join and surface the mark of a craftsman. He was still looking at it when Herrick returned from seeing the other captains over the side into their various boats. He sighed. “Went well, I thought, sir.” He saw the cabinet and gave a low whistle. “Now there is a thing of beauty!” Bolitho smiled. “It was a gift. More useful than some, I’d say, Thomas.” Herrick was examining it carefully and said, “I have your nephew outside, sir. I have dealt with his foolishness. Some extra duties to entertain his busy mind. I thought you’d like to see him.” He touched the cabinet, adding, “May I enquire who gave you this fine piece, sir?” Bolitho replied, “Mrs. Pareja. You will recall her, of course.” He checked himself as something like a shutter dropped behind Herrick’s eyes. Herrick said flatly, “Yes, sir. I remember her well.” “What is it, man?” Herrick faced him. “With ships coming fresh from England, sir, there is always rumour, scandal if you like. There was some talk about your meeting with the lady in London.” Bolitho stared at him. “In God’s name, Thomas, this doesn’t sound like you.” Herrick persisted, “Because of it, your nephew crossed swords with another lieutenant.” He added stubbornly, “A matter of honour they call it.” Bolitho looked away. And he had been imagining it was because of Pascoe’s background, his dead father. Traitor and renegade. He said, “Thank you for telling me.” “Somebody had to, sir.” The blue eyes were pleading. “You’ve done so much, for all of us, I’d not wish to see it thrown away because of a—” “I thanked you for telling me, Thomas. Not for your opinion of the lady.” Herrick opened the door. “I will call him in, sir.” He did not look back. Bolitho sat down on the bench seat below the stern windows and watched a fishing boat sculling below the two-decker’s counter. The fisherman glanced up at him without expression. Probably in the pay of the Spanish commandant across the water in Algeciras, he thought. Taking the names of the ships. Tit-bits of information which might convey something in return for a few coins. The door opened and Adam Pascoe stood inside the cabin, his hat tucked under his arm. Bolitho stood up and walked towards him, feeling something like pain as he saw the way the youth was holding his arm away from his ribs. Even in his lieutenant’s uniform he looked the same lean boy who had first been sent to him as a midshipman. He said, “Welcome aboard, sir.” Bolitho forgot the weight of his new responsibility, his unwanted clash with Herrick, everything but the youth who had come to mean so much. He embraced him and said, “You’ve been in trouble, Adam. I am sorry it was of my doing.” Pascoe watched him gravely. “I would not have killed him, Uncle.” Bolitho stood back from him and smiled sadly. “No, Adam, but he might have finished you. Eighteen years is a beginning, not an end.” Pascoe pushed the black hair from his forehead and shrugged. “The captain has given me enough extra duties
 for my pains.” He looked at Bolitho’s shoulder. “How is the wound, Uncle?” “Forgotten.” He led him to a chair. “Like your own, eh?” They smiled like conspirators as Bolitho poured two glasses of claret. He noticed that Pascoe’s hair was cut in the new style, without any queue at the nape of his neck like most sea officers. He wondered what sort of a navy it would be when his nephew’s broad pendant flew one day. Pascoe sipped the wine. “They are saying in the squadron that this command would have been Nelson’s had he not lost his arm.” He watched him questioningly. Bolitho smiled. There were few secrets in the fleet. “Perhaps.” Pascoe nodded, his eyes distant. “A great honour, Uncle, but—” “But what?” “A great responsibility also.” Herrick reappeared at the door. “May I ask what time you would wish the other captains to return aboard, sir?” He looked from one to the other and felt strangely moved. About twenty years between them, yet they looked like brothers. Bolitho replied, “I will leave it to you.” When Herrick had gone Pascoe asked simply, “Is anything between you and Captain Herrick, Uncle?” Bolitho touched his arm. “Nothing that can harm our friendship, Adam.” Pascoe appeared satisfied. “I’m glad.” Bolitho reached for the decanter. “Now, tell me what you have been doing since I last saw you.” 2 SMALL BEGINNING BOLITHO moved restlessly around his day cabin, one hand reaching out to touch objects not yet familiar. Around and above him the Lysander’s seventeen hundred tons of timbers and spars, artillery and men creaked and groaned to the pressure of a rising north-westerly wind. He had to forcibly restrain himself from peering from one or other of the quarter windows to see how the rest of his squadron were getting on with preparations for weighing. He heard occasional shouts and the thump of bare feet as seamen raced in all directions to complete last minute tasks, and he could picture Herrick as he, too, fretted over each delay. It was all Bolitho could do to leave Herrick alone on the quarterdeck. As a captain, Bolitho had been made to take his ships to sea in every sort of condition. From a lively sloop to the towering three-decker Euryalus in which he had been flag captain he had experienced the anxious moments before the anchor broke from the sea bed. For Herrick it would be much the same, if not worse. To look at a captain on his own quarterdeck, remote and aloof from the bustle and confusion all around him, protected from criticism by his authority and his gleaming epaulettes, any idler might think he was beyond ordinary fears and feelings. Bolitho had thought much in that way when he had been a junior lieutenant, or for that matter a midshipman. A captain had been a sort of god. He had lived an unreachable existence beyond his cabin bulkhead, and had but to scowl to have every officer and seaman quaking. But now, like Herrick, he knew differently. The greater the responsibility the greater the honour. Equally, you had further to fall from grace if things went badly. Allday came into the cabin and rubbed his large hands. There were droplets of spray on his blue jacket, and he had a kind of wildness in his eyes. He too, was feeling it. Eager to quit the land again. Like a hunter who goes to pit his strength against the unknown. Needing to do it, but never knowing if each time was the last. The coxswain grinned. “They’re doing well, sir. I’ve just been up to the boat tier to watch over your barge. There’s a fair breeze from the nor’-west. The squadron will make a goodly sight when we beat clear of the Rock.” Bolitho tensed, his head to one side as something clattered and dragged along the deck above. A voice bellowed harshly, “Belay that line, you bugger!” He bit his lip, imagining all manner of things going wrong. Allday watched him thoughtfully. “Cap’n Herrick will see us clear, sir.” “I know.” He nodded as if to seal the conviction. “I know.”

Kent, Alexander (1999-09-30T23:58:59). Signal?Close Action!: The Richard Bolitho Novels (The Bolitho Novels Book 12) (Kindle Locations 109-467). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

THE frigate Harvester, nine days outward bound from Spithead, turned easily into the gentle offshore breeze and dropped anchor, the echoes of her gun salute reverberating and grumbling around the towering wall of Gibraltar’s unchanging Rock. Her young captain let his eye rest a moment longer on the busy activity below the quarterdeck as his men threw themselves into the work of swaying out boats, urged on by sharp commands and more than one cuff from an impatient petty officer. Entering harbour was always a tense moment, and the captain knew that he was not the only one aboard who was aware of the big ships of the line anchored nearby, the largest of which wore a vice-admiral’s flag at the fore, and no doubt there were several telescopes already trained on his small command ready to reprimand or criticise. With a final glance he strode aft and crossed to the starboard side where a tall, solitary figure leaned against the hammock nettings. “Shall I signal for a boat, sir? Or would one of mine be sufficient?” Captain Richard Bolitho pulled himself from his thoughts and turned to face the other man. “Thank you. Captain Leach, I will take yours. It will save time.” He imagined he saw a touch of relief in the man’s eyes, and realised that it could not have been easy for so young and junior a captain, who had not yet attained the coveted post rank, to carry him from England as a passenger. He relaxed slightly and added, “You have a fine ship. We made a quick passage.” He shivered in spite of the early morning sunlight and saw Leach watching him with new interest. But what could he understand of Bolitho’s feelings? While the frigate had beaten down the English Channel and round Brest, where once more the British squadrons rode out all weathers to watch over a blockaded French fleet, Bolitho’s thoughts had reached far beyond the plunging bowsprit to this moment only. Down across the Bay, with its blustering winds and savage currents, and still further south until the coast of Portugal loomed like a blue mist far abeam. He had had plenty of time to think of what lay ahead, of his new command, and all that she might come to mean to him. In his solitary walks on the frigate’s spray-dashed quarter-deck he had been conscious of his role as a mere passenger, and more than once had had to check himself from interfering in the running of the ship. Now, beneath the Rock’s great shadow, he must push such thoughts out of his mind. He was no longer a frigate captain with all the independence and dash that post entailed. Within minutes he would take command of a ship of the line, one of those which swung so calmly and so confidently above their reflections just two cables distant. He made himself look squarely at the one which lay astern of the flagship. A two-decker, one of the seventy-four-gun ships which made up the backbone of England’s far-stretched squadrons. The frigate beneath his feet moved restlessly even within the calm waters of the anchorage, her tapered top-masts spiralling against the washed-out blue sky, her rigging humming as if from impatience at the very necessity of being near her heavier consorts. By comparison the two-decker looked squat and unmoving, her towering masts and yards, her double line of ports, adding to her appearance of ponderous power, around which the busy harbour craft scurried like so many water-beetles. The other man watched the gig being rowed round to the entry port and saw Bolitho’s coxswain standing beside a pile of personal luggage like a thickset dog guarding his master’s most prized possessions. He said, “You’ve a good man there, sir.” Bolitho followed his glance and smiled. “Allday has been with me since . . .” His mind went back over the years without effort, as if every thought and each memory was always lying in wait like a half-forgotten picture. He said abruptly, “My first coxswain was killed at the Saintes in ’ 82 . Allday has been with me ever since.” Just a few words of explanation, yet how much more they meant to Bolitho, just as Allday’s familiar shape was a constant reminder. Now the Saintes and the frigate Phalarope were eleven years in the past, and England was at war again. Leach watched Bolitho’s grave face and wondered. During the uneventful voyage from Spithead he had wanted to confide with him, but something had stopped him. He had brought plenty of other passengers to Gibraltar and usually they made a pleasant diversion in the daily routine. Officers for the garrison, couriers and replacements for men killed by accident or design in a war which was already spreading in every direction. But something in Bolitho’s impassive, almost withdrawn manner had deterred him from close contact. He looked at him now with a mixture of interest and envy. Bolitho was a senior captain and about to take a step which with any luck at all would place him on the list for flag rank within a few years, maybe only months. From what Bolitho had said he guessed him to be in his middle or late thirties. He was tall and surprisingly slim, and when he smiled his face became equally youthful. It was said that Bolitho had been away for several years between the wars in the Great South Sea and had come back half dead with fever. It was probably true, he decided. There were deep lines at the corners of his mouth, and beneath the even tan there was a certain fineness to the skin and cheekbones which betrayed such an illness. But the hair which was pulled back to the nape of his neck was black, without even a touch of grey, and the one lock which curled down above his right eye added to his appearance of controlled recklessness. A lieutenant touched his hat, “Boat’s ready, sir.” Bolitho held out his hand. “Well, goodbye for the present, Leach. No doubt we will meet again directly.” The frigate’s captain smiled for the first time. “I hope so, sir.” He snapped his fingers with sudden irritation. “I almost forgot! There is a midshipman aboard who is also appointed to your ship. Will he go across with you?” He spoke carelessly, as if he were discussing a piece of unwanted baggage, and Bolitho grinned in spite of his inner anxiety. “We were all midshipmen once, Leach.” He nodded. “He can come with me.” Bolitho climbed down the ladder to the entry port where the bosun’s mates and marines were assembled to see him over the side. His boxes had already vanished, and Allday was waiting by the bulwark, his eyes watching Bolitho as he knuckled his forehead and reported, “All stowed, Captain.” Bolitho nodded. There was something very reassuring about Allday. He was no longer the lithe topman he had once been. He had filled out now, so that in his blue jacket and wide duck trousers he looked muscular and unbreakable, like a rock. But his eyes were still the same. Half thoughtful, half amused. Yes, it was good to have him here today. Then Bolitho saw the midshipman. He got a quick impression of a pale, delicate face and a thin, gangling body which did not seem able to hold still. It was odd that he had not seen him before within the close world of the frigate, he thought. As if reading his mind Leach said shortly, “He’s been seasick for most of the voyage.” Bolitho asked kindly, “What is your name, boy?” The midshipman began, “S-S-Seton, sir.” Then he lapsed into blushing silence. Leach said unfeelingly, “He stutters, too. I suppose we must take all kinds in times like these.” Bolitho hid a smile. “Quite so.” He waited a moment and then added, “Well, Mr Seton, you go down into the boat first, if you please.” He saw the boy’s mind wrestling with this early complication in his new career and then said, “Carry on, Allday.” He hardly heard the twitter of pipes or the harsh bark of commands, and only when the gig had moved clear of the frigate’s hull and the oars sent her skimming across the unbroken water did he permit himself another glance at his new ship. Allday followed his stare, and said quietly, “Well there she is, Captain. The old Hyperion. ”
 As the little gig pulled steadily over the blue water Bolitho concentrated his full attention on the anchored Hyperion. Allday had perhaps made his comment without thought, yet his words seemed to jar another chord in Bolitho’s mind as if to rule out this further meeting as mere coincidence. Hyperion was an old ship, for it was twenty-one years since her keel had first tasted salt water, and Bolitho’s rational mind told him that it was inevitable he should see her from time to time as his service carried him from one part of the world to the next. Yet whenever his mind and body had been tried to the limit it now seemed as if this old ship of the line had somehow been close by. At the bloody battles of the Chesapeake, and again at the Saintes, when his own beloved frigate had almost been pounded into submission, he had seen her blunt bows thrusting through the thickest of the smoke, her sides flashing with gunfire and sails pockmarked with holes as she fought to hold her place in the line. He narrowed his grey eyes as the sunlight lanced up from the water and threw a pattern of dancing reflections across the ship’s tall side. He knew that she had been in steady commission now for over three years and had returned home from the West Indies with high hopes for a quick pay-off and well-earned rest both for herself and her company. But while Hyperion had sailed serenely on her peacetime affairs in the Caribbean sunlight and Bolitho had fought wretchedly against a consuming fever in his house at Falmouth, the clouds of war had gathered once more across Europe. The bloody revolution which had seized France from coast to coast had at first been viewed with nervous excitement from across the English Channel, a human reaction of people who watch an old enemy weakened from within without cost to themselves, but as the fury spread and the stories filtered back to England of a new, even more powerful nation emerging from the din of execution squads and mob carnage, those who had known danger and fear in the past accepted the inevitability of yet another war. Followed by an anxious and protesting Allday, Bolitho had left his bed and had made his way to London. He had always detested the false gaiety of the town, with its sprawling, dirty streets and the contrasting splendour of its great houses, but he had made up his mind that if necessary he would bend his knee and plead for a new ship. After weeks of fretting and fruitless interviews he had been given the task of recruiting unwilling inhabitants of the Medway towns to fill the ships which were at last being called into commission. To the senior powers of the Admiralty whose immediate duty it was to expand and equip a depleted fleet Bolitho was a clever choice for the work of recruitment. His exploits as a young frigate captain were still well remembered, and when war came his was the kind of leadership which might win men from the land for the uncertainties and hardships of a life at sea. Unfortunately Bolitho did not view his appointment with the same enthusiasm. It was somehow characteristic of his make-up that he saw it as a lack of confidence and trust by his superiors whom he suspected of thinking the worst about his recent illness. A sick captain could be a danger. Not just to himself and his ship, but to the vital chain of command, which once weakened could bring disaster and defeat. The following January England had reeled from the news that the King of France had been beheaded by his own people, and before their minds could adjust to the shock the new French National Convention declared war. It was as if the fury of the whole French nation had shaken the country from the course of reason. Even Spain and Holland, old allies from the past, had received the same declaration, and now, like England, stood awaiting the first real onslaught. And so the old Hyperion had sailed again with hardly a pause in harbour. To Brest and the inevitable lot of the Channel Squadron to blockade and watch over the French ships sheltering beneath the guns of the shore batteries. Bolitho had continued with his task, his despair at not being given an immediate command only helping to play fresh havoc with his health. Then as winter gave way to spring he had received his orders to proceed to Spithead and take passage for Gibraltar. As he sat in the stern of the gig he could feel the heavy envelope in his breast pocket, the authority to control and command this ship which now towered above him and reduced all else to insignificance. Already he could hear the twitter of pipes, the stampede of bare feet and the clatter of muskets as she prepared to receive him. He wondered briefly how long they had awaited his appearance, whether or not his arrival would be greeted with pleasure or misgivings. It was one thing to take command from another captain who was leaving for promotion or retirement, quite another to step into a dead man’s shoes. The gig rounded the high bows and Bolitho stared up at the bright overhanging figurehead. Like the rest of the paintwork the figurehead’s gilt looked fresh and clean which was one small sign of a well-run ship. Hyperion the Sun God carried an out-thrust trident and was crowned with the rising sun itself. Only a pair of staring blue eyes broke the sheen of gold, and Bolitho found time to wonder how many of the King’s enemies had seen that gilt face through the smoke and had died minutes later. He looked round as he heard something like a gasp and saw the thin midshipman staring up at the towering masts and furled sails. His face seemed full of dread, and the hand which gripped the boat’s gunwale was stiff like a claw. Bolitho asked quietly, “How old are you, Mr Seton?” The boy tore his eyes from the ship and muttered, “S-Sixteen, sir.” Bolitho nodded gravely. “Well, I was about your age when I joined a ship very like this one. That was the year Hyperion was built.” He gave a wry smile. “And as you see, Mr Seton, we are both still here!” He saw the emotions chasing each other across the midshipman’s pale face and was glad he had omitted to add that the occasion he had described had been his second ship. At that time, and from the age of twelve, he had been constantly at sea. He wondered why Seton’s father had left it so late before sending him into the Navy. He straightened his back as the boat shot forward towards the entry port and a voice rang out, “Boat ahoy?” Allday cupped his hands and yelled, “Hyperion!” If doubt there had been, there was none now. Every man aboard would know that the straight-backed figure in the gold-laced hat was his new master, the man who, next to God, held complete sway over every life in his ship. One who could flog or hang, just as he could equally reward and recognise the faults or efforts of everybody under his hand. As the oars were tossed and the bowman hooked on to the main chains it took all of Bolitho’s self-control to hold himself motionless in the sternsheets. Strangely, it was the seasick midshipman who broke the spell. He made to scramble towards the side, but Allday growled, “Not yet, my young gentleman!” He pulled him back to his seat and added, “Seniors are last in the boat but first out, got it?” Bolitho stared at each of them and then forgot them. Pulling his sword against his thigh, for once he had witnessed a new captain falling headlong backwards into his barge, he climbed stiffly up through the curved and gilded entry port. As he removed his hat he was almost overwhelmed by the immediate response which seemed to come from every side, from above and below his bared head. The greeting which had started with the shrill scream of pipes as his face had appeared over the side burst into a wild crescendo of noise which at first his mind had difficulty in sorting out. The drums and fifes of a small marine band, the slap and snap of muskets being brought to the present and the swish of swords completing the general salute. He felt hemmed in by the scarlet ranks of marines, the blue and white of assembled officers, and, above all, the packed faces and pigtailed heads of the men who had been hurriedly called from their duties throughout the ship. He should have been ready, but in his heart he knew he had been so long in frigates that this sudden upsurge of figures had caught him entirely off guard. As his mind accepted this and his eye moved quickly over the nearest rank of shining guns, the freshly holystoned planking and the taut web of rigging and shrouds, he became aware, perhaps for the first time, of his new responsibility. Up to this instant he had been considering the Hyperion only as a different way of life. Now, as the band fell into sudden silence and a tall, grave-faced lieutenant stepped forward to meet him, he understood his real purpose. The realisation both surprised and humbled him. Here within her fat, one-hundred-eighty-foot hull the Hyperion contained a whole new world. A strange imprisoned existence in which some six hundred officers and men lived, worked and, if required, died together, yet stayed apart in their own segments of discipline and seniority. It was hardly surprising that many captains of such ships as Hyperion were overwhelmed by their sense of power and self-importance. He realised that the tall officer was watching him intently, his face set in an expressionless mould. He said, “Lieutenant Quarme, sir. I am the senior aboard.” Bolitho nodded. “Thank you, Mr Quarme.” He reached inside his coat and drew out his commission. The noise and sudden excitement had left him feeling faint. After the weeks of waiting and fretting all at once he needed to find the privacy of his new quarters. This Quarme looked a competent enough officer, he thought. He had a sudden picture of Herrick, his old first lieutenant in the Phalarope and the Tempest, and wished with his heart that he and not Quarme had stepped
 forward to greet him. Quarme moved quietly along the rank of officers, murmuring names and adding small additions about their duties. Bolitho kept his face quite impassive. It was far too early for smiles and general acknowledgments. The real men would emerge later from behind these stiff, respectful faces. But they seemed a general enough collection, he decided vaguely, but so many of them after a frigate. He walked along the rank, past the lieutenants and senior warrant officers to where the midshipmen waited with fascinated attention. He thought of young Seton and wondered what he was thinking of this awesome spectacle. Terrified, most likely. Two marine officers stood rigidly before the scarlet ranks with their white crossbelts and silver buttons, and across the main press of figures beyond were the other warrant officers, the professionals who decided whether a ship would live or die. The boatswain and the carpenter, the cooper and all the rest. He felt the sun very warm across his check and hurriedly opened his papers. He saw the watching figures crowd forward to hear and see better, and others dropped their eyes as he looked towards them, as if afraid of making a bad impression at such an early moment. He read the commission briskly and without emotion. It was addressed to Richard Bolitho, Esquire, from Samuel Hood, Admiral of the Red, and required him to take upon him the charge and command of captain in His Britannic Majesty’s ship Hyperion. Most of the men had heard such commissions read before, some no doubt many times, yet as he read through the neat, formal phrases he was conscious of the silence. As if the whole ship were holding her breath. Bolitho rolled up the papers and returned them to his pocket. From one corner of his eye he saw Allday move slightly aft towards the quarterdeck ladder. As always he was ready to mark the way for his retreat from formality and discomfort. In spite of the sun across the tops of the hammock nettings he felt light-headed and suddenly chilled. But he gritted his teeth and forced himself to remain quite motionless in front of the marines. This was a crucial moment in his life. His impression on his men might later decide their fate as well as his own. He had a sudden, sickening picture of himself falling in a fresh bout of fever with every eye watching his disgrace and humiliation, and surprisingly the mental scene helped to steady him. He raised his voice. “I will not keep you long from your duties, as there is much to do. The water lighters will be alongside directly, for I intend to hold this favourable wind and make sail this afternoon.” He saw two of the lieutenants exchange quick glances and added in a harder note, “My orders require me to take this ship and join Lord Hood’s squadron off Toulon without delay. Once there we will make every effort to contain the enemy within his harbours, but if possible, and whenever possible, we will seek him out and destroy him.” A slight murmur moved through the packed seamen and Bolitho guessed that even up to the last moment when the ship was detached from the Brest blockade and ordered to Gibraltar to receive a new captain many hopeful souls aboard had retained the belief that the Hyperion would be returning home. His words, his new commission, had killed that hope stone dead. Now, with the first fragment of spread canvas and the merest puff of wind, every mile which dragged beneath the weed-covered keel would carry them further and further away from England. For many it might be a one-way journey. He added more calmly. “England is at war with a tyrant. We need every ship and every loyal man to overthrow him. See to it that each one of you does his best. In my part I will do mine.” He turned on his heel and nodded curtly. “Carry on, Mr Quarme. Detail water parties and make sure the purser has plenty of fresh fruit aboard.” He stared across the mist-shrouded bay towards Algeciras. “With Spain our new ally it should not be too difficult.” The first lieutenant touched his hat. Then he called, “Three cheers for King George!” Bolitho walked slowly aft, feeling drained and ice cold. The answering cheers were ready enough, but more from duty than feeling. He climbed the ladder and walked across the spacious quarterdeck. As he lowered his head beneath the poop Allday said quietly, “No need to duck here, sir.” He was grinning. “Plenty of room for you now.” Bolitho did not even hear him. Ignoring the rigid marine sentry he stepped over the coaming and into his wide stern cabin. His private world. He was still thinking of the ship as Allday closed the door and began to unpack one of his boxes.
 Richard Bolitho pushed some of the litter of papers across his desk and sat back to rest his eyes. When he examined his pocket watch he realised with a start that he had been poring over the ship’s books and records for almost six hours without respite, his busy mind conscious the whole time of the noises beyond the closed door and across the deck above.

Kent, Alexander (1999-03-31T23:58:59). Form Line of Battle!: The Richard Bolitho Novels (The Bolitho Novels Book 9) (Kindle Locations 126-335). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

THE NORMALLY sheltered waters of Portsmouth Harbour seemed to cringe under the intensity of a biting north-easterly which had been blowing for some twelve hours. The whole anchorage was transformed into an endless mass of cruising whitecaps with lively catspaws to mark its progress around the many black-and-buff hulls of moored men-of-war, making them tug violently at their cables. It was late March, a time when winter was still reluctant to release its grip and eager to display its latent power. One of the largest ships, recently warped from the dockyard where she had suffered the indignities of repairs to the lower hull, was the second-rate Black Prince of 94 guns, her fresh paintwork and blacked-down rigging shining like glass from blown spray and a brief rainsquall which even now had reached as far out as the Isle of Wight, a dull blur in the poor light. Black Prince was one of the most powerful of her kind, and to anyone but a true sailor she would appear a symbol of sea-power, the country’s sure shield. The more experienced eye would recognise her empty yards, the canvas not yet sent up to give her life as well as strength. She was surrounded by lighters and dockyard longboats, while small armies of riggers and ropemakers moved busily about her decks, and the clatter of hammers and the squeak of tackles were evidence of the work being carried out in the deep holds and on the gun-decks. Alone by the packed hammock-nettings Black Prince’s captain stood at the quarterdeck rail and watched the comings and goings of seamen and dockyard workers, who in turn were supervised by the ship’s warrant officers, the true backbone of any warship. Captain Valentine Keen tugged his hat still tighter across his fair hair but was otherwise oblivious, even indifferent, to the biting wind and the fact that his flapping blue coat with its tarnished sea-going epaulettes was soaked through to his skin. Without looking, he knew that the men on watch near the deserted double-wheel were very aware of his presence. A quartermaster, a boatswain’s mate and a small midshipman who occasionally raised a telescope to peer at the signal tower or the admiral’s flagship nearby, a sodden flag curling and cracking from her main truck. Many of the men who had served the guns around him when they had fought and all but destroyed the big French three-decker off the coast of Denmark had been taken from his command while the ship had undergone repairs from that short, savage embrace. Some for promotion to other vessels, others because, as the port admiral had put it, “My captains need men now, Captain Keen. You will have to wait.” Keen allowed his mind to stray back over the battle, the terrible sight in the dawn when they had gone to assist Rear-Admiral Herrick’s Benbow in his defence of a twenty-ship convoy destined for the invasion of Copenhagen. Shattered, burning hulks, screaming cavalry horses trapped below in the transports, and Benbow completely dismasted, her only other escort capsized, a total loss. Mercifully Benbow had been towed to the Nore for docking. It would be too painful to see her here every waking day. A constant reminder, especially for Vice-Admiral Sir Richard Bolitho, whose flag would soon break out again from this ship’s foremast. Herrick had been Bolitho’s oldest friend, but Keen had been more angered than saddened by Herrick’s behaviour both before and after Benbow’s last fight. It might well be her last too, he thought grimly. With the many ships they had seized from Copenhagen to bolster their own depleted fleets and squadrons, any dockyard might think twice before committing itself to such a programme of repairs and restoration. Keen thought of Bolitho, a man he cared for more than any other. He had served him as midshipman and lieutenant, and with him in the same squadron until eventually he had become his flag captain. Keen imagined him now with his lovely Catherine, as he had done so often since their return to England. He had tried to close his mind to it, not to make comparisons. But he had wanted a love like theirs for himself, the same challenging passion which had captured the hearts of ordinary people everywhere, and had roused the fury of London society because of their open relationship. A scandal, they proclaimed. Keen sighed. He would give his soul to be in the same position. He walked to the small table beneath the overhang of the dripping poop and opened the log at the place marked with a piece of polished whalebone. He stared at the date on the damp page for several seconds. How could he forget? March 25 th 1808, two months exactly since he had put the ring on the hand of his bride in the tiny village church at Zennor, which had given her her name. Like the battle which had preceded his wedding by four months, it seemed like yesterday. He still did not know. Did she love him, or was her marriage an act of gratitude? He had rescued her from a convict ship, and from transportation for a crime she had not committed. Or did his uncertainty stem from the fact that he was almost twice her age, when he believed she could have chosen anyone? If he did not contain it, Keen knew it would drive him mad. He was almost afraid to touch her, and when she had given herself to him it had been an act without passion, without desire. She had merely submitted, and later during that first night he had found her by the embers of the fire downstairs, sobbing silently as if her heart had already broken. Time and time again Keen had reminded himself of Catherine’s advice when he had visited her in London. He had confessed his doubts about Zenoria’s true feelings for him. Catherine had said quietly, “Remember what happened to her. A young girl—taken and used, with no hope, and nothing to live for.” Keen bit his lip, recalling the day he had first seen her, seized up, almost naked, her back laid open from shoulder to hip while the other prisoners had watched like wild beasts, as if it had been some kind of savage sport. So perhaps it was, after all, gratitude; and he should be satisfied, as many men would be merely to have her. But he was not. He saw the first lieutenant, James Sedgemore, striding aft towards him. He at least seemed more than pleased with his lot. Keen had promoted him to senior lieutenant after the tough Tynesider Cazalet had been cut in half on this same quarterdeck on that terrible morning. The enemy ship had been the San Mateo, a powerful Spaniard sailing under French colours, and she had crushed the convoy and its escorts like a tiger despatching rabbits. Keen had never seen Bolitho so determined to destroy any ship as he had been to put down San Mateo. She had sunk his old Hyperion. He had needed no other reason. Keen often found himself wondering if Bolitho would have held to his threat to keep pouring broadsides into San Mateo, which had already been crippled in the first embrace at close quarters. Until they strike their colours. Thank God someone still sane enough to think and act in that hell of iron and screaming splinters had brought the flags tumbling down. But would he have continued, without mercy, otherwise? I may never know. Lieutenant Sedgemore touched his hat, his face red in the stinging air. “I shall be able to get the sails ready for bending-on tomorrow, sir.” Keen glanced at the Royal Marine sentries by the hatchways and up on the forecastle. With the land so close there were always the reckless few who would try to run. It would be hard enough to get more hands, especially in a naval port, without allowing men the opportunity to desert. Keen had much sympathy for his men. They had been kept aboard or sent directly to other ships to fill the gaps, without any chance to see their loved ones or their homes. Keen had spent more time than was necessary on board, simply to show his depleted company that he was sharing it with them. Even as it crossed his mind, he knew that too was a lie. He had stayed because of his fear that he might make Zenoria openly reject him, unable even to pretend. “Something wrong, sir?” “No.” It came out too sharply. “Vice-Admiral Bolitho will be coming aboard at noon.” He looked across the nettings at the shining walls of the dockyard and harbour battery and on to the huddled buildings of Portsmouth Point, beyond which the Channel and the open sea were waiting. Bolitho might be over there already; at the old George Inn, perhaps? Unlikely. Catherine would be with him. He would not risk a snub or anything else which might distress her. Sedgemore kept his young features impassive. He had never really liked his predecessor, Cazalet. A fine seaman, admittedly, but a man who was so coarse in his speech and behaviour that he had been hard to work with. He watched the bustling figures at the tackles, swaying up more bales and boxes from one of the lighters alongside. Well, he was the first lieutenant now, in one of the navy’s newest and most powerful three-deckers. And with an admiral like Sir Richard Bolitho and a good captain like Keen, there would be no stopping them once they were at sea again. Promotion, prize-money, fame; there was no end to it, in his mind anyway. It was the navy’s way, Sedgemore thought. If a dead man’s shoes were offered, you never waited for a second chance. Keen said distinctly, “Tell my cox’n to prepare the barge, and have the crew piped at six bells. Inspect them yourself, although I doubt if Tojohns will leave anything to chance.” He glanced at the open log again where the midshipman-of-the-watch was writing something, his tongue poking from one corner of his mouth with great concentration. Another picture crossed his mind. His coxswain, Tojohns, on his wedding day only two months ago, supervising the garlanded carriage which had been towed by the midshipmen and petty officers of this ship, his ship, with himself and his young bride inside. He turned
 aft and stalked away beneath the poop to seek the one place he could be alone. Sedgemore watched him go and rubbed his chin thoughtfully. A post-captain—what Sedgemore himself would be one day if everything went well for him, and he managed to avoid Cazalet’s fate. To be captain of a ship like Black Prince . . . He looked up and around him. There was no higher reward for any man. He would want for nothing. He saw the midshipman staring at him and rasped, “Mr M’Innes, I’ll trouble you not to waste your time, sir!” It was uncalled for; but it made him feel more like a first lieutenant. Lieutenant Stephen Jenour caught his breath as he turned the corner above the shining dockyard stairs which led directly down to the landing stage. After two months ashore either working for Vice-Admiral Sir Richard Bolitho or visiting his parents in Southampton, he felt at odds with the sea and the bitter wind. He thrust open a small door and saw a blazing fire shining a welcome across the room. A uniformed servant asked coldly, “Your name, sir?” “Jenour.” He added sharply, “Flag lieutenant to Sir Richard Bolitho.” The man bowed himself away, muttering something about a warming drink, and Jenour was childishly pleased at his ability to command instant respect. “Welcome, Stephen.” Bolitho was sitting in a high-backed chair, the fire reflecting from his gold lace and epaulettes. “We have a while yet.” Jenour sat down and smiled at him. So many things had changed his young life since joining Bolitho. His parents had laughed at him for vowing that one day he would serve this incredible man who had been, until Nelson’s death at Trafalgar less than three years ago, the second youngest vice-admiral on the Navy List. Now he was the youngest. He never tired of recalling each separate incident, even that stark moment when Black Prince had been about to leave Copenhagen in search of Herrick, and Bolitho had turned on him in pleading desperation and confirmed his worst fears. “I am losing my sight, Stephen. Can you keep a secret so precious to me?” And later when Bolitho had said, “ They must not know. You are a dear friend, Stephen. Now there are other friends out there who need us.” Jenour sipped the hot drink. There was brandy in it, and spices too, and his eyes smarted but he knew it was from that memory and nothing else. A dear friend, and one of the few who knew the extent of the injury to Bolitho’s left eye. To be entrusted with such a secret was a reward greater than anything he had believed possible. He asked carefully, “What will Captain Keen’s answer be, Sir Richard?” Bolitho put down his empty goblet and thought of Catherine, imagined he could still feel the warmth of her body in his arms as they had parted this morning. She would be well on her way to London now, to the house she had bought by the river in Chelsea. Their private place as she had called it, where they could be alone together when they were required to be in the capital. It was strange to be without Allday, but his coxswain—his “oak”—had gone with Yovell, his secretary, and Ozzard his little servant, in the same coach. Catherine was fearless, but Bolitho felt safer on her behalf knowing that she travelled with such a staunch escort. He thought too of his last interview with Lord Godschale at the Admiralty, and Godschale’s attempts to soothe him whenever he touched on a point which might provoke controversy. “Their lordships insist that you are the best choice of flag officer to go to Cape Town. You had, after all, a vital part in taking it from the Dutch—our people know you and trust you accordingly. It should not take long, but it needs your handling to establish regular patrols of smaller craft in the area, and perhaps to send more of the major men-of-war back to England. When you have installed a post-captain in overall charge there—acting-commodore if you like—you can return too. I will offer you a fast frigate, and do everything possible for you.” He had given the great sigh of one overburdened with responsibility. “Even while Admiral Gambier and your own squadron were in Copenhagen preparing the prizes for their passage here, Napoleon was already busy elsewhere. God damn the fellow—twice he has attempted to seize the Danish fleet, and he has even provoked Turkey to turn against his old ally the Tsar of Russia. As fast as we seal one door, he explores another.” It was difficult not to admire Napoleon’s ever-changing strategy, Bolitho had often conceded. Shortly after Herrick’s hopeless fight to save his convoy, the French army had invaded Portugal, and by November was in Lisbon, with the royal family in flight to their possessions in Brazil. It was rumoured in Whitehall that Spain, another ally if an unwilling one, would be Napoleon’s next target. He would then become a ruler of overwhelming strength, a threat once again with all the riches of Spain to support him. Bolitho had said, “I think that this time he may have overreached himself. He has turned Portugal into an enemy, and will surely incite Spain to rise against him. It will be our one chance. A place to land an army where it will find friendship, and be treated as a liberation force.” Godschale had looked distant. “Perhaps, perhaps.” Another secret. Jenour knew; so did Yovell and Allday. Bolitho had refused to take passage in a frigate and had seen Godschale’s heavy features go almost purple as he had exclaimed, “Do you mean to say that you are going to take Lady Catherine Somervell with you on passage to Cape Town?” Bolitho had been adamant. “A ship of war is no place for a lady, my lord. Although I am sure Lady Catherine would accept without hesitation.” Godschale had mopped his face. “I will arrange it. A fast packet under Admiralty warrant. You are a damned difficult fellow to deal with, Sir Richard. What people will say when they discover—” “We shall simply have to ensure they do not, my lord.” When he had told Catherine she had been surprisingly excited about it. “To be there with you, dearest of men, instead of reading of your exploits in the Gazette, to be part of it all . . . I ask for nothing more.” The door opened and the servant peered in at them. “I beg your pardon, Sir Richard, but it is reported that your barge has just left Black Prince. ” Bolitho nodded and remarked to Jenour, “I’ll wager Captain Keen will be surprised to find that I am not staying aboard.” Jenour followed him from the snug shelter of the senior officers’ waiting room. He knew that Keen cared for Bolitho as much as he did himself. Would he leave Black Prince in exchange for some obscure position in Cape Town as captain in command of all local patrols? It would mean a broad-pendant, and the real possibility of promotion to rear-admiral after that, if everything went well. But it would also mean leaving his bride behind so soon after their marriage, as well as severing his close links with the man who was even now standing at the top of the dripping stairs, peering across the tossing array of whitecaps. I am fortunate that the choice is not mine. Not yet, in any case . . . Bolitho pulled his boat-cloak around his body and watched the green-painted barge pulling lustily across the choppy water, the oars rising and falling as one, the bargemen very smart in their checkered shirts and tarred hats. Keen’s coxswain would be in charge today, and Bolitho was suddenly uneasy, knowing that Allday would not be there. He thought of Catherine’s happiness at the prospect of their journey, when before, when he had told her about Cape Town, there had been only anger and despair. “Is there nobody else they can send, Richard? Must it always be you?” When Godschale’s acceptance of his request that she accompany him had been delivered to Falmouth, she had thrown her arms about him like a child. Together. The word which had become a symbol to both of them. Ever since Keen’s wedding they seemed to have spent days on the terrible winter roads: London, Falmouth and London again. He thought of their last night at a small secluded inn Allday had recommended; as, seated in the waiting room before Jenour had arrived, he had stared into the fire, remembering it. The need of one for the other, until they had lain by the fire in the inn’s private room, unwilling to waste the night in sleep. The bargemen tossed their oars and sat stiffly facing aft while the bows were made fast to the stairs. The first lieutenant stepped lightly on to the wet stairs and raised his hat, his eyes everywhere, puzzled as he realised there was no chest or luggage to be stowed aboard. “Good day, Mr Sedgemore.” Bolitho gave a brief smile. “As you see, mine is a short visit this time.” He and Jenour settled themselves in the sternsheets and the barge cast off, shipping water over the stem as they quit the shelter of the wall. “Repairs going well, Mr Sedgemore?” The lieutenant swallowed hard. He was unused to casual conversation with a vice-admiral. “Aye, Sir Richard. It will be a month or so yet, I’m told.” Bolitho watched the passing dockyard boats, and a yawl towing a new mast for some ship undergoing refit. If Napoleon did invade Spain, the naval blockade would have to be tighter than ever until they could put an army ashore to meet the French in open battle. He thought sadly of Herrick. Even his poor, battered Benbow might be sent back into the fray. He heard the distant crack of a musket, and saw figures running on to Black Prince’s forecastle; he guessed that a marine had just fired on a would-be deserter. Sedgemore said between his teeth, “I think they got him.” Bolitho looked at him calmly. “Would it not be more useful to put your pickets on the foreshore and catch them if they swim there? A corpse is little use for anything, I’d have thought.” It was mildly said, but Jenour saw the first lieutenant wince as if he had been hit in the face. The next few moments put all
 else from his mind. The climb up the slippery side, the trill of calls and the stamp and crash of the Royal Marines’ guard of honour. Then Keen, his handsome features full of welcome as he stepped forward to greet him. They shook hands, and Keen guided him aft to the great cabin. “Well, Val?” Bolitho sat down and looked at his friend. “You will not be hampered by me again just yet.” He watched Keen pouring claret, noting the lines around his mouth. Strain of command. The many, many difficulties of completing a refit and putting right the wounds of battle. Making up a depleted company, storing, taking on powder and shot, preparing new watch-bills to eke out the experienced hands among the volunteers and pressed men. Bolitho had known all these challenges even in his first command, a small sloop-of-war. “It is good to see you.” Keen offered him a goblet. “Your visit sounds something of a mystery.” He smiled, but it did not reach his eyes. “And how is Zenoria? Missing you, no doubt?” Keen turned away and fumbled with his keys. “There was a despatch delivered on board this morning, sir. It came by posthorse from the Admiralty.” He opened a drawer and took it out. “I forgot, in the excitement of your arrival.” Bolitho took it and glanced at the seal. Something was wrong. Catherine had hinted as much. He said, “I am ordered to Cape Town, Val, to ensure there is no further complacency. We need more local patrols than ever now that the anti-slavery bill has been passed in Parliament. Slavers, pirates, privateers—they will all need seeking out.” Keen stared at him as if he had not heard properly. Bolitho added quietly, “They require an experienced postcaptain to command there. He will have the broad-pendant of commodore for his pains. I will return to Black Prince eventually, but if you accept this appointment, you will not.” “I, sir?” Keen put down his goblet without seeing it. “Quit Black Prince? ” He looked up, his eyes full of dismay. “And leave you, sir?” Bolitho smiled. “This war is coming to a crisis, Val. We must put an army into Europe. We shall need our best leaders when that time comes. You are an obvious choice—you’ve earned it ten times over, and the fleet will need flag officers like you now that Our Nel is dead.” He recalled the general he had met just before they had managed to retake Cape Town. Despite all the triumphs at sea, they will be as nought until the English foot-soldier plants his boots on the enemy’s own shores. Keen walked to the spray-streaked stern windows and stared down at the distorted waves beneath the counter. “When might this be, sir?” He sounded dazed by the sudden turn of events. Trapped. “Soon. Black Prince, I am assured, will be in dockyard hands for some while yet.” Keen turned. “Advise me, sir.” Bolitho took a knife and slit open the thick envelope. “I know what it means to be parted from a lover. But it is the lot of every sea officer. It is also his duty to seize any opportunity for advancement, to which he is truly suited, and from which his country may benefit.” Keen looked away. “I would like to accept, sir.” He did not even hesitate. Bolitho read quickly through the neat lettering and said gravely, “You have a further duty while you hold command here, Val.” He tossed the letter on to the table. “There has been a court of enquiry at the Governor’s house here in Portsmouth. Their lordships have decided that Rear-Admiral Herrick must stand trial at a court martial on the prescribed date.” Keen picked up the letter. “Misconduct and neglect of duty . . .” He did not continue. “My God, sir.” “Read on. The court martial will be held here in Black Prince, your command and my flagship.” Keen nodded, understanding at last. “Then I am eager for the Cape, sir.” He finished with sudden bitterness, “I will not be needed here.” Bolitho took his hat from the cabin servant. Then he said, “When you are ready, Val, please tell me . . . tell us. It is what true friends are for.” Keen seemed to search his face for something. “That I shall never forget.” “I am depending on it.” He hesitated, hearing the marine guard stamping into line at the entry port. “Your pain is mine, as mine has too often been yours.” Ebenezer Julyan, the sailing-master, was loitering by the wheel, and Bolitho guessed he had been waiting purposely to see him. As though it were yesterday, he recalled Julyan’s grin of pleasure as they had sailed to meet the towering San Mateo, when Bolitho had given him his own gold-laced hat to wear to make the enemy believe that Black Prince was a Danish prize. He called, “Did you give that hat to your boy, Mr Julyan?” The man laughed. “I did that, sir. It made a rare stir in th’ village! It be good to see ’ee again, Sir Richard!” Bolitho looked round at other familiar faces, who had also faced death that day. He thought too of Keen’s bitter comments; then he touched the silver locket through his shirt, the one she had fastened around his neck this morning as she always did when they were to be parted, even for a few hours. May Fate always guide you. May Love always protect you. With Keen so downcast, it seemed wrong to think of all the happiness she had given him. Catherine, Lady Somervell, walked to the window with its small iron balcony and looked out across the swirling Thames. The city had been wide awake by the time her mud-spattered carriage had clattered to a halt outside this small, elegant house in Chelsea, the streets full of traders and carters from the various markets hawking meat, fish, vegetables, all a reminder of the London she had known as a very young girl; the London she had shown in part to Bolitho. It had been a long hard journey on that appalling road, past leafless trees stark against a cold moon, and splashing through a downpour an hour later. They had stopped every so often to eat and drink, but not until Bolitho’s portly Devonian secretary Yovell had inspected each inn to make certain it was suitable for her to enter. Several times he had climbed back into the carriage, grimly shaking his head to signal Matthew to drive on. They had looked after her wonderfully, she thought. They had refilled her copper foot-warmer with boiling water at each stop, and ensured that she had been well wrapped in rugs as well as her long velvet cloak, and independent though she was, she had been glad of their company. The house felt strange after Falmouth, damp and unfamiliar, and she was thankful for the fires blazing in most of the rooms. She thought of the grey Bolitho house below Pendennis Castle, and was still strangely surprised that she could miss it so much when she was away from it. She heard Allday laugh in the kitchen, and somebody, probably the faithful, silent little Ozzard, putting logs on one of the fires. Once during the journey on a comparatively smooth stretch of road, when Yovell had fallen asleep and Ozzard had been outside on the coachman’s box, she had engaged Allday in conversation, listening intently as he had answered her questions and spoken of his early days with the man she loved. The ships and the battles, although she knew he had skirted around the latter. He never tried to shock or impress her, and he seemed to feel free enough to speak with her on equal terms, almost as a friend. When she had asked him about Herrick, he had been more wary. “I first knew him as one of the Cap’n lieutenants in the old Phalarope— back in eighty-two, it was.” He had given his lazy grin. “Course, I didn’t exactly volunteer, so to speak.” It seemed to amuse him. “When the Cap’n finally left Phalarope he took us with him, me an’ Bryan Ferguson. Then I became his cox’n.” He had shaken his head like a big shaggy dog. “Lot of water since them days.” Then he had looked at her very directly. “Rear-Admiral Herrick is a stubborn man, begging your pardon, m’lady. An honest gentleman, an’ that’s rare enough these days, but . . .” Catherine had watched his uncertainty. “Sir Richard is deeply concerned about him. His oldest friend, would you say?” It had given Allday the time he needed. “Next to me, m’lady! But folk don’t change, no matter what their circumstances. Sir Richard never has. A flag officer he may be, a hero to most people he certainly is, but he’s no different to the young cap’n I saw in tears at the death of a friend.” “You must tell me that too, Allday. There are so many gaps I want . . . I need to fill.” The carriage had lurched into a deep rut and Yovell had awakened with a startled grunt. “Where are we?” But Allday had looked at her in that same level way, as he had at English Harbour when her husband had been alive, and Bolitho had become her lover again after their stupid separation. “I’ll tell you, m’lady, don’t you fret. This passage we’re makin’ to the Cape will show you the man we sees, not the one who comes home from the ocean. The King’s officer.” She heard herself laugh. “I do believe you are filling in your own gaps about me, Allday!” Now for a few more moments she was alone in the room where they had loved so demandingly, as if they were trying to make up for the lost years. She thought of Valentine Keen, his troubled face when he had spoken to her of his hopes and fears for his marriage to Zenoria. Another mystery: so close a band of brothers—poor Oliver Browne’s “happy few”—and yet there was a coldness between Herrick and Keen. Because of Bolitho, or because of Zenoria? She had never mentioned to Richard what she had seen in Adam’s face at Keen’s wedding. She might after all have been mistaken. In the same heartbeat, she knew she was not; she was too experienced not to recognise that Adam, Richard’s nephew and the nearest to a son he would ever know, was in love with Keen’s Zenoria. But Adam was a captain now, albeit a very young one, and his first frigate, the Anemone, was somewhere at sea with the Channel Fleet. It was just as well, at least until things
 settled down again. She tossed away her cloak and gazed at herself critically in a tall mirror. A woman envied, admired and hated. She cared for none of it. She saw only the woman who was loved by England’s hero. The man. She smiled, remembering Allday’s sage-like confidences. Not the King’s officer. She was waiting for Bolitho when he reached the house in the late evening, although she had had no forewarning of the time of his arrival. He strode through the doors and gave his hat and cloak to the new maidservant, before taking Catherine in his arms. They kissed, and he studied her for several seconds. “Thomas Herrick is to be court-martialled.” She put her arms around his neck. “My news is not good either.” He held her away, searching her face anxiously. “You’re not ill, Kate? What has happened?” She said, “There was a woman here today.” “Who?” “She left a card.” Her voice was husky, almost despairing. “It was ‘expected’ that you might be here, she said.” She looked at him directly. “Your daughter is unwell. The person sent as messenger would tell me nothing further.” Bolitho stared at her, expecting bitterness or resentment. There was neither. It was more an acceptance of something which had always been there, and always would. Catherine said, “You will have to go, Richard. No matter what you feel for your wife, or for what she connived at with my late husband. It is not in your nature or mine to run away.” She touched the cheek near his damaged eye, her voice a whisper so soft that he could barely hear it. “Some may call me the vice-admiral’s whore, but such fools are to be pitied rather than scorned. When you look at me as you are doing now I can barely let you go. And every time you enter me it is as the first time, and I am reborn.” She lifted her chin and he saw the pulse beating in her throat. “But stand between us, my darling Richard? Only death will ever do that.” She turned away and called to Allday, whom she had sensed to be waiting in the hall. “Stay with him—you are his right arm. Under these circumstances I cannot go. It would only harm him.”

Kent, Alexander (2005-09-30T23:58:59). Beyond the Reef (The Bolitho Novels Book 19) (Kindle Locations 154-466). McBooks Press. Kindle Edition. 

AN ADMIRALTY messenger opened the door of a small anteroom and said politely, “If you would be so good as to wait, sir.” He stood aside to allow Captain Richard Bolitho to pass and added, “Sir John knows you are here.” Bolitho waited until the door had closed and then walked to a bright fire which was crackling below a tall mantel. He was thankful that the messenger had brought him to this small room and not to one of the larger ones. As he had hurried into the Admiralty from the bitter March wind which was sweeping down Whitehall he had been dreading a confrontation in one of those crowded waiting-rooms, crammed with unemployed officers who watched the comings and goings of more fortunate visitors with something like hatred. Bolitho had known the feeling, too, even though he had told himself often enough that he was better off than most. For he had come back to England a year ago, to find the country at peace, and the towns and villages already filling with unwanted soldiers and seamen. With his home in Falmouth, an established estate, and all the hard-earned prize money he had brought with him, he knew he should have been grateful. He moved away from the fire and stared down at the broad roadway below the window. It had been raining for most of the morning, but now the sky had completely cleared, so that the many puddles and ruts glittered in the harsh light like patches of pale blue silk. Only the steaming nostrils of countless horses which passed this way and that, the hurrying figures bowed into the wind, made a lie of the momentary colour. He sighed. It was March, 1784, only just over a year since his return home from the West Indies, yet it seemed like a century. Whenever possible he had quit Falmouth to make the long journey to London, to this seat of Admiralty, to try and discover why his letters had gone unanswered, why his pleas for a ship, any ship, had been ignored. And always the waiting-rooms had seemed to get more and more crowded. The familiar voices and tales of ships and campaigns had become forced, less confident, as day by day they were turned away. Ships were laid up by the score, and every seaport had its full quota of a war’s flotsam. Cripples, and men made deaf and blind by cannon fire, others half mad from what they had seen and endured. With the signing of peace the previous year such sights had become too common to mention, too despairing even for hope. He stiffened as two figures turned a corner below the window. Even without the facings on their tattered red coats he knew they had been soldiers. A carriage was standing by the roadside, the horses nodding their heads together as they explored the contents of their feeding bags. The coachman was chatting to a smartly dressed servant from a nearby house, and neither took a scrap of notice of the two tattered veterans. One of them pushed his companion against a stone balustrade and then walked towards the coach. Bolitho realised that the man left clinging to the stonework was blind, his head turned towards the roadway as if trying to hear where his friend had gone. It needed no words. The soldier faced the coachman and his companion and held out his hand. It was neither arrogant nor servile, and strangely moving. The coachman hesitated and then fumbled inside his heavy coat. At that moment another figure ran lightly down some steps and wrenched open the coach door. He was well attired against the cold, and the buckles on his shoes held the watery sunlight like diamonds. He stared at the soldier and then snapped angrily at his coachman. The servant ran to the horses’ heads, and within seconds the coach was clattering away into the busy press of carriages and carts. The soldier stood staring after it and then gave a weary shrug. He returned to his companion, and with linked arms they moved slowly around the next corner. Bolitho struggled with the window catch, but it was stuck fast, his mind reeling with anger and shame at what he had just seen. A voice asked, “May I help, sir?” It was the messenger again. Bolitho replied, “I was going to throw some coins to two crippled soldiers!” He broke off, seeing the mild astonishment in the messenger’s eyes. The man said, “Bless you, sir, you’d get used to such sights in London.” “Not me.” “I was going to tell you, sir, that Sir John will see you now!” Bolitho followed him into the passageway again, conscious of the sudden dryness in his throat. He remembered so clearly his last visit here, a month ago almost to the day. And that time he had been summoned by letter, and not left fretting and fuming in a waiting-room. It had seemed like a dream, an incredible stroke of good fortune. It still did, despite all the difficulties which had been crammed into so short a time. He was to assume command immediately of His Britannic Majesty’s Ship Undine, of thirty-two guns, then lying in the dock- yard at Portsmouth completing a refit. As he had hurried from the Admiralty on that occasion he had felt the excitement on his face like guilt, aware of the other watch- ing eyes, the envy and resentment. The task of taking command, of gathering the dockyard’s re- sources to his aid to prepare Undine for sea, had cost him dearly. With the Navy being cut down to a quarter of its wartime strength he had been surprised to discover that it was harder to obtain spare cordage and spars rather than the reverse. A weary shipwright had confided in him that dockyard officials were more intent on mak- ing a profit with private dealers than they were on aiding one small frigate. He had bribed, threatened and driven almost every man in the yard until he had obtained more or less what he needed. It seemed they saw his departure as the only way of returning to their own affairs. He had walked around his new command in her dock with mixed feelings. Above all, the excitement and the challenge she represented. Gone were the pangs he had felt in Falmouth when- ever he had seen a man-of-war weathering the headland below the castle. But also he had discovered something more. His last com- mand had been Phalarope, a frigate very similar to Undine, if slightly longer by a few feet. To Bolitho she had been everything, perhaps because they had come through so much together. In the West Indies, at the battle of the Saintes he had felt his precious Phalarope battered almost to a hulk beneath him. There would never, could never, be another like her. But as he had walked up and down the stone wall of the dock he had sensed a new elation. Halfway through the hurried overhaul he had received an un- heralded visit from Rear Admiral Sir John Winslade, the man who had greeted him at the Admiralty. He had given little away, but after a cursory inspection of the ship and Bolitho’s preparations he had said, “I can tell you now. I’m sending you to India. That’s all I can reveal for the moment.” He had run his eye over the few riggers working on yards and shrouds and had added dryly, “I only hope for your sake you’ll be ready on time.” There was a lot in what Winslade had hinted. Officers on half- pay were easy to obtain. To crew a King’s ship without the urgency of a war or the pressgang was something else entirely. Had Undine been sailing in better-known waters things might have been differ- ent. And had Bolitho been a man other than himself he might have been tempted to keep her destination a secret until he had signed on sufficient hands and it was too late for them to escape. He had had the usual flowery-worded handbills distributed around the port and nearby villages. He had sent recruiting parties as far inland as Guildford on the Portsmouth Road, but with small success. And now, as he followed the messenger towards some high gilded doors he knew Undine was still fifty short of her complement. In one thing Bolitho had been more fortunate. Undine ’s previous captain had kept a shrewd eye on his ship’s professional men. Bolitho had taken charge to discover that Undine still carried the hard core of senior men, the warrant officers, a first class sailmaker, and one of the most economical carpenters he had ever watched at work. His predecessor had quit the Navy for good to seek a career in Parliament. Or as he had put it, “I’ve had a bellyful of fighting with iron. From now on, my young friend, I’ll do it with slander!” Rear Admiral Sir John Winslade was standing with his back to a fire, his coat-tails parted to allow the maximum warmth to reach him. Few people knew much about him. He had distinguished himself vaguely in some single-ship action off Brest, and had then been neatly placed inside the Admiralty. There was nothing about his pale, austere features to distinguish him in any way. In fact, he was so ordinary that his gold-laced coat seemed to be wearing him rather than the other way round. Bolitho was twenty-seven and a half years old, but had already held two commands, and knew enough about senior officers not to take them at face value. Winslade let his coat-tails drop and waited for Bolitho to reach him. He held out his hand and said, “You are punctual. It is just as well. We have much to discuss.” He moved to a small lac- quered table. “Some claret, I think.” He smiled for the first time. It was like the sunlight in Whitehall. Frail, and easily removed. He pulled up a chair for Bolitho. “Your health, Captain.” He added, “I suppose you know why I asked for you to be given this command?” Bolitho cleared his throat. “I assumed, sir, that as Captain Stewart was entering politics that you required another for . . .” Winslade gave a wry smile. “ Please, Bolitho. Modesty at the expense of sincerity is just so much top-hamper. I trust you will bear that in mind?” He sipped at his claret and continued in the same dry voice, “For this particular commission I have to be sure of Undine ’s cap- tain. You will be on the other side of the globe. I have to
 know what you are thinking so that I can act on such despatches as I might receive in due course.” Bolitho tried to relax. “Thank you.” He smiled awkwardly. “I mean, for your trust, sir.” “Quite so.” Winslade reached for the decanter. “I know your background, your record, especially in the recent war with France and her Allies. Your behaviour when you were on the American station reads favourably. A full scale war and a bloody rebellion in America must have been a good schoolroom for so young a com- mander. But that war is done with. It is up to us,” he smiled slightly, “ some of us, to ensure that we are never forced into such a helpless stalemate again.” Bolitho exclaimed, “We did not lose the war, sir.” “We did not win it either. That is more to the point.” Bolitho thought suddenly of the last battle. The screams and yells on every side, the crash of gunfire and falling spars. So many had died that day. So many familiar faces just swept away. Others had been left, like the two ragged soldiers, to fend as best they could. He said quietly, “We did our best, sir.” The admiral was watching him thoughtfully. “I agree. You may not have won a war, but you did win a respite of sorts. A time to draw breath and face facts.” “You think the peace will not last, sir?” “An enemy is always an enemy, Bolitho. Only the vanquished know peace of mind. Oh yes, we will fight again, be sure of it.” He put down his glass and added sharply, “Now, about your ship. Are you prepared?” Bolitho met his gaze. “I am still short of hands, but the ship is as ready as she will ever be, sir. I had her warped out of the dock- yard two days ago, and she is now anchored at Spithead awaiting final provisioning.” “How short?” Two words, but they left no room for manoeuvre. “Fifty, sir. But my lieutenants are still trying to gather more.” The admiral did not blink. “I see. Well, it’s up to you. In the meantime I will obtain a warrant for you to take some ‘volunteers’ from the prison hulks in Portsmouth harbour.” Bolitho said, “It’s a sad thing that we must rely on convicts.” “They are men. That is all you require at the moment. As it is, you will probably be doing some of the wretches a favour. Most of ’em were to be transported to the penal colonies in America. Now, with America gone, we will have to look elsewhere for new settle- ments. There is some talk of Botany Bay, in New Holland, but it may be rumour, of course.” He stood up and walked to a window. “I knew your father. I was saddened to hear of his death. While you were in the West Indies, I believe?” He did not wait for a reply. “This mission would have been well cut for him. Something to get his teeth into. Self- dependence, decisions to be made on the spot which could make or break the man in command. Everything a young frigate captain dreams of, right?” “Yes, sir.” He pictured his father as he had last seen him. The very day he had sailed for the Indies in Phalarope. A tired, broken man. Made bitter by his other son’s betrayal. Hugh Bolitho had been the apple of his eye. Four years older than Richard, he had been a born gambler, and had ended in killing a brother officer in a duel. Worse, he had fled to America, to join the Revolutionary forces and later to command a privateer against the British. It had been that knowledge which had really killed Bolitho’s father, no matter what the doctor had said. He tightened his grip on his glass. Much of his prize money had gone into buying back land which his father had sold to pay Hugh’s debts. But nothing could buy back his honour. It was fortunate that Hugh had died. If they had ever met again Bolitho imagined he might kill him for what he had done. “More claret?” Winslade seemed absorbed with his own thoughts. “I’m sending you to Madras. There you will report to . . . well, it will be in your final orders. No sense in idle gossip.” He added, “Just in case you cannot get your ship manned, eh?” “I’ll get them, sir. If I have to go to Cornwall.” “I hope that will not be necessary.” Winslade changed tack again. “During the American campaign you probably noticed that there was little co-operation between military and civilian government. The forces on the ground fought the battles and confided in neither. That must not happen again. The task I am giving you would be better handled by a squadron, with an admiral’s flag for good measure. But it would invite attention, and that Parliament will not tolerate in this uneasy peace.” He asked suddenly, “Where are you staying in London?” “The George at Southwark.” “I will give you an address. A friend’s residence in St. James’s Square.” He smiled at Bolitho’s grave features. “Come, don’t look so gloomy. It is time you made your way in affairs and put the line of battle behind you. Your mission may bring you to eyes other than those of jaded flag officers. Get to know people. It can do nothing but good. I will send a courier with instructions for your first lieutenant.” He darted him a quick glance. “Herrick, I gather. From your last ship.” “Yes, sir.” It sounded like “of course.” There had never been any doubt whom he would ask for if he got another ship. “Well then, Mr. Herrick it is. He can take charge of local matters. I’ll need you in London for four days.” He hardened his tone as Bolitho looked about to protest. “At least!” The admiral regarded Bolitho for several seconds. Craving to get back to his ship, uncertain of himself in these overwhelming surroundings. It was all there and more besides. As Bolitho had entered the room it had been like seeing his father all those long years ago. Tall, slim, with that black hair tied at the nape of his neck. The loose lock which hung above his right eye told another story. Once as he had raised his glass it had fallen aside to display a livid scar which ran high into the hairline. Winslade was glad about his choice. There was intelligence on Bolitho’s grave features, and compassion too, which even his service in seven years of war had not displaced. He could have picked from a hundred captains, but he had wanted one who needed a ship and the sea and not merely the security such things represented. He also required a man who could think and act accordingly. Not one who would rest content on the weight of his broadsides. Bolitho’s record had shown plainly enough that he was rarely content to use written orders as a substitute for initiative. Several admirals had growled as much when Winslade had put his name forward for command. But he had got his way, for Winslade had the weight of Parliament behind him, which was another rarity. He sighed and picked up a small bell from the table. “You go and arrange to move to the address I will give you. I have much to do, so you may as well enjoy yourself while you can.” He shook the bell and a servant entered with Bolitho’s cocked hat and sword. Winslade watched as the man buckled the sword deftly around his waist. “Same old blade, eh?” He touched it with his fingers. It was very smooth and worn, and a good deal lighter than more modern swords. Bolitho smiled. “Aye, sir. My father gave it to me after . . .” “I know. Forget about your brother, Bolitho.” He touched the hilt again. “Your family have brought too much honour for many generations to be brought down by one man.” He thrust out his hand. “Take care. I daresay there are quite a few tongues wagging about your visit here today.” Bolitho followed the servant into the corridor, his mind mov- ing restlessly from one aspect of his visit to another. Madras, another continent, and that sounded like a mere beginning to whatever it was he was supposed to do. Every mile sailed would have its separate challenge. He smiled quietly. And reward. He paused in the doorway and stared at the bustling people and carriages. Open sea instead of noise and dirt. A ship, a living, vital being instead of dull, pretentious buildings. A hand touched his arm, and he turned to see a young man in a shabby blue coat studying him anxiously. “What is it?” The man said quickly, “I’m Chatterton, Captain. I was once second lieutenant in the Warrior, seventy-four.” He hesitated, watching Bolitho’s grave face. “I heard you were commissioning, sir, I was wondering . . .” “I’m sorry, Mr. Chatterton. I have a full wardroom.” “Yes, sir, I had guessed as much.” He swallowed. “I could sign as master’s mate perhaps?” Bolitho shook his head. “It is only seamen I lack, I’m afraid.” He saw the disappointment clouding the man’s face. The old Warrior had been in the thick of it. She was rarely absent from any battle, and men had spoken her name with pride. Now her second lieutenant was waiting like a beggar. He said quietly, “If I can help.” He thrust his hand into his pocket. “Tide you over awhile.” “Thank you, no, sir.” He forced a grin. “Not yet anyway.” He pulled up his coat collar. As he walked away he called, “Good luck, Captain!” Bolitho watched him until he was out of sight. It might have been Herrick, he thought. Any of us. His Majesty’s frigate Undine tugged resentfully at her cable as a stiffening south-easterly wind ripped the Solent into a mass of vicious whitecaps. Lieutenant Thomas Herrick turned up the collar of his heavy watch coat and took another stroll across the quarterdeck, his eyes slitted against a mixture of rain and spray which made the rigging shine in the poor light like black glass. Despite the weather there was still plenty of activity on deck and alongside in the pitching store boats and water lighters. Here and there on the gangways and right forward in the eyes of the ship the red coats of watchful marines made a pleasant change from the mixtures of dull grey elsewhere. The marines were sup- posed to ensure that the traffic in provisions and last moment equipment was one way, and none was escaping through an open port as barter for cheap drink or other favours with friends ashore. Herrick
 grinned and stamped his feet on the wet planking. They had done a lot of work in the month since he had joined the ship. Others might curse the weather, the uncertainties offered by a long voyage, the prospect of hardship from sea and wind, but not he. The past year had been far more of a burden for him, and he was glad, no thankful, to be back aboard a King’s ship. He had entered the Navy when he was still a few weeks short of twelve years old, and these last long months following the signing of peace with France and the recognition of American independence had been his first experience of being away from the one life he understood and trusted. Unlike many of his contemporaries, Herrick had nothing but his own resources to sustain him. He came of a poor family, his father being a clerk in their home town of Rochester in Kent. When he had gone there after paying off the Phalarope and saying his farewell to Bolitho, he had discovered things to be even worse than he had expected. His father’s health had deteriorated, and he seemed to be coughing his life away, day in, day out. Herrick’s only sister was a cripple and incapable of doing much but help her mother about the house, so his homecoming was seen in rather different ways from his own sense of rejection. A friend of his father’s employer had gained him an appointment as mate in a small brig which earned a living carrying general cargo up and down the east coast and occasionally across the channel to Hol- land. The owner was a miserly man who kept the brig so shorthanded that there were barely enough men to work ship, let along handle cargo, load lighters and keep the vessel in good repair. When he had received Bolitho’s letter, accompanied by his commission from the Admiralty charging him to report on board Undine, he had been almost too stunned to realise his good for- tune. He had not seen Bolitho since that one last visit to his home in Falmouth, and perhaps deep inside he had believed that their friendship, which had strengthened in storm and under bloody broadsides, would be no match for peace. Their worlds were, after all, too far apart. Bolitho’s great stone house had seemed like a palace to Herrick. His background, his ancestry of seafaring officers, put him in a different sphere entirely. Herrick was the first in his family to go to sea, and that was the least of their differences. But Bolitho had not changed. When they had met on this same quarterdeck a month ago he had known it with that first glance. It was still there, the quiet sadness, which could give way to something like boyish excitement in the twinkling of an eye. Above all, Bolitho too was pleased to be back, keen to test himself and his new ship whenever a chance offered itself. A midshipman scuttled over the deck and touched his hat. “Cutter’s returning, sir.” He was small, pinched with cold. He had been aboard just three weeks. “Thank you, Mr. Penn. That’ll be some new hands, I hope.” He eyed the boy unsympathetically. “Now smarten yourself, the captain may be returning today.” He continued his pacing. Bolitho had been in London for five days. It would be good to hear his news, to get the order to sail from this bitter Solent. He watched the cutter lifting and plunging across the white- caps, the oars moving sluggishly despite the efforts of the boat’s coxswain. He saw the cocked hat of John Soames, the third lieu- tenant, in the sternsheets, and wondered if he had had any luck with recruits. In the Phalarope Herrick had begun his commission as third lieutenant, rising to Bolitho’s second-in-command as those above him died in combat. He wondered briefly if Soames was already thinking of his own prospects in the months ahead. He was a giant of a man and in his thirtieth year, three years older than Herrick. He had got his commission as lieutenant very late in life, and by a roundabout route, mostly, as far as Herrick could gather, in the merchant service and later as master’s mate in a King’s ship. Tough, self-taught, he was hard to know. A suspicious man. Quite different from Villiers Davy, the second lieutenant. As his name suggested, he was of good family, with the money and proud looks to back up his quicksilver wit. Herrick was not sure of him either, but told himself that any dislike he might harbour was because Davy reminded him of an arrogant midshipman they had carried in Phalarope . Feet thumped on deck and he turned to see Triphook, the purser, crouching through the drizzle, a bulky ledger under his coat. The purser grimaced. “Evil day, Mr. Herrick.” He gestured to the boats alongside. “God damn those thieves. They’d rob a blind man, so they would.” Herrick chuckled. “Not like you pursers, eh?” Triphook eyed him severely. He was stooped and very thin, with large yellow teeth like a mournful horse. “I hope that was not seriously meant, sir? ” Herrick craned over the dripping nettings to watch the cutter hooking on to the chains. God, their oarsmanship was bad. Bolitho would expect far better, and before too long. He snapped, “Easy, Mr. Triphook. But I was merely reminding you. I recall we had a purser in my last ship. A man called Evans. He lined his pockets at the people’s expense. Gave them foul food when they had much to trouble them in other directions.” Triphook watched him doubtfully. “What happened?” “Captain Bolitho made him pay for fresh meat from his own purse. Cask for cask with each that was rotten.” He grinned. “So be warned, my friend!” “He’ll have no cause to fault me, Mr. Herrick.” He walked away, his voice lacking conviction as he added, “You can be certain of that.” Lieutenant Soames came aft, touching his hat and scowling at the deck as he reported, “Five hands, sir. I’ve been on the road all day, I’m fair hoarse from calling the tune of those handbills.” Herrick nodded. He could sympathise. He had done it often enough himself. Five hands. They still needed thirty. Even then it would not allow for death and injury to be expected on any long voyage. Soames asked thickly, “Any more news?” “None. Just that we are to sail for Madras. But I think it will be soon now.” Soames said, “Good riddance to the land, I say. Streets full of drunken men, prime hands we could well do with.” He hesitated. “With your permission I might take a boat away tonight and catch a few as they reel from their damn ale houses, eh?” They turned as a shriek of laughter echoed up from the gun deck, and a woman, her breasts bare to the rain, ran from beneath the larboard gangway. She was pursued by two seamen, both obviously the worse for drink, who left little to the imagination as to their intentions. Herrick barked, “Tell that slut to get below! Or I’ll have her thrown over the side!” He saw the astonished midshipman watching the spectacle with wide-eyed wonder and added harshly, “Mr. Penn! Jump to it, I say!” Soames showed a rare grin. “Offend your feelings, Mr. Herrick?” Herrick shrugged. “I know it is supposed to be the proper thing to allow our people women and drink in harbour.” He thought of his sister. Anchored in that damned chair. What he would give to see her running free like that Portsmouth trollop. “But it never fails to sicken me.” Soames sighed. “Half the bastards would desert otherwise, signed on or not. The romance of Madras soon wears off when the rum goes short.” Herrick said, “What you asked earlier. I cannot agree. It would be a bad beginning. Men taken in such a way would harbour plenty of grievances. One rotten apple can sour a full barrel.” Soames eyes him calmly. “It seems to me that this ship is al- most full of bad apples. The volunteers are probably on the run from debt, or the hangman himself. Some are aboard just to see what they can lay their fingers on when we are many miles from proper authority.” Herrick replied, “Captain Bolitho will have sufficient author- ity, Mr. Soames.” “I forgot. You were in the same ship. There was a mutiny.” It sounded like an accusation. “Not of his making.” He turned on him angrily. “Be so good as to have the new men fed and issued with slop clothing.” He waited, watching the resentment in the big man’s eyes. He added, “Another of our captain’s requirements. I suggest you acquaint yourself with his demands. Life will be easier for you.” Soames strode away and Herrick relaxed. He must not let him get into his skin so easily. But any criticism, or even hint of it, al- ways affected him. To Herrick, Bolitho represented all the things he would like to be. The fact he also knew some of his secret faults as well made him doubly sure of his loyalty. He shook his head. It was stronger even than that. He peered over the nettings towards the shore, seeing the walls of the harbour battery glinting like lead in the rain. Beyond Ports- mouth Point the land was almost hidden in murk. It would be good to get away. His pay would mount up and go towards helping out at home. With his share of prize money, which he gained un- der Bolitho in the West Indies he had been able to buy several small luxuries to make their lot easier until his next return. And when might that be? Two years? It was better never to contemplate such matters. He saw a ship’s boy duck into the rain to turn the hour-glass beside the deserted wheel, and waited for him to chime the hour on the bell. Time to send the working part of the watch below. He grimaced. The wardroom might be little better. Soames under a cloud of inner thought. Davy probing his guard with some new, smart jest or other. Giles Bellairs, the captain of marines, well on the way to intoxication by this time, knowing his hefty sergeant could deal with the affairs of his small detachment. Triphook prob- ably brooding over the issue of clothing to the new men. Typical of the purser. He could face the prospect of a great sea voyage, with each league measured in salt pork and beef, iron-hard biscuit, juice to prevent
 scurvy, beer and spirits to supplement fresh water which would soon be alive in its casks, and all the thousand other items under his control, with equanimity. But one small issue of clothing, while they still wore what they had come aboard in, was too much for his sense of values. He would learn. He grinned into the cold wind. They all would, once Bolitho brought the ship alive. More shouts from alongside, and Penn, the midshipman, called anxiously, “Beg pardon, sir, but I fear the surgeon is in difficulties.” Herrick frowned. The surgeon’s name was Charles Whit- marsh. A man of culture, but one with something troubling him. Most ship’s surgeons, in Herrick’s experience, had been butchers. Nobody else would go to sea and face the horrors of mangled men screaming and dying after a savage battle with the enemy. In peacetime he had expected it might be different. Whitmarsh was a drunkard. As Herrick peered down at the jolly boat as it bobbed and curtsied at the chains, he saw a boatswain’s mate and two seamen struggling to fit the surgeon into a bowline to assist his passage up the side. He was a big man, al- most as large as Soames, and in the grey light his features shone with all the brightness of a marine’s coat. Herrick snapped, “Have a cargo net lowered, Mr. Penn. It is not dignified, but neither is this, by God!” Whitmarsh landed eventually on the gun deck, his hair awry, his face set in a great beaming smile. One of his assistants and two marines lifted him bodily and took him aft below the quarterdeck. He would sleep in his small sickbay for a few hours, and then begin again. Penn asked nervously, “Is he unwell, sir?” Herrick looked at the youth gravely. “A thought tipsy, lad, but well enough to remove a limb or two, I daresay.” He relented and touched his shoulder. “Go below. Your relief will be up soon.” He watched him hurry away and grinned. It was hard to recall that he had been like Penn. Unsure, frightened, with each hour presenting some new sight and sound to break his boy’s illusions. A marine yelled, “Guardboat shovin’ off from the sallyport, sir!” Herrick nodded. “Very well.” That would mean orders for the Undine. He let his gaze move forward between the tall, spiralling masts with their taut maze of shrouds and rigging, the neatly furled canvas and to the bowsprit, below which Undine ’s beautiful, full-breasted figurehead of a water- nymph stared impassively to every horizon. It also meant that Bolitho would be returning. Today. And for Thomas Herrick that was more than enough. 2
FREE OF THE LAND CAPTAIN Richard Bolitho stood in the shelter of the stone wall beside the sallyport and peered through the chilling drizzle. It was afternoon, but with the sky so overcast by low cloud it could have been much later. He was tired and stiff from the long coach ride, and the journey had been made especially irritating by his two jovial companions. Businessmen from the City of London, they had become more loud-voiced after each stop for change of horses and refreshment at the many inns down the Portsmouth road. They were off to France in a packet ship, to contact new agencies there, and so, with luck, expand their trade. To Bolitho if was still hard to accept, just a year back the Channel had been the only barrier between this country and their common enemy. The moat. The last ditch, as some news-sheet had described it. Now it seemed as if it was all forgotten by such men as his travelling companions. It had become merely an irritating delay which made their journey just so much longer. He shrugged his shoulders deeper inside his boat-cloak, sud- denly impatient for the last moments to pass, so that he could get back to the ship. The cloak was new, from a good London tailor. Rear Admiral Winslade’s friend had taken him there, and man- aged to do so without making Bolitho feel the complete ignoramus. He smiled to himself despite his other uncertainties. He would never get used to London. Too large, too busy, where nobody had time to draw breath. And noisy. No wonder the rich houses around St. James’s Square had sent servants out every few hours to spread fresh straw on the roadway. The grinding roar of carriage wheels was enough to wake the dead. It had been a beautiful house, his hosts charming, if slightly amused by his ques- tions. Even now, he was still unsure of their strange ways. It was not just enough to live in that fine, fashionable residence, with its splendid spiral staircase and huge chandeliers. To be right, you had to live on the best side of the square, the east side. Winslade’s friends lived there. Bolitho smiled again. They would. Bolitho had met several very influential people, and his hosts had given two dinner parties with that in mind. He knew well enough from past experience that without their help it would have been impossible. Aboard ship a captain was next only to God. In London society he hardly registered at all.
