Kane clasped his spyglass and aimed it at Tortuga's busy port. Sailors carried barrels and wooden crates on their shoulders as they loaded and unloaded boats. Prostitutes, swaying their hips and revealing cleavage, tried to entice the sailors with their goods. Kane sighted in on a man with curly brown hair, the wind blowing strands free of his neatly tied queue, pacing the busy docks. He held his head high and clasped his hands behind his rigid back. Blood dripped down his chin. Kane's stomach dropped. He recognized his brother, despite the fat swollen lip, grubby white shirt and green breeches. William never wore his shirt unbuttoned, and was emphatic about having a shine to his boots. He always dressed like an officer. Something was off. Why was William alone? Where the hell was Ronan Macmillan? Damn it! Kane had sent Ronan and William last week to investigate the whereabouts of the Fiery Damsel. Palmer and his crew had been attacking the islands and Kane wanted to know why. At first, Kane had refused William's demand to go, since he was human and not cursed. But his brother would not be left behind. Ronan had volunteered to keep William safe, his brother's chagrin at being treated less than capable. Where was Ronan? The man must be dead. He'd never abandon William. Kane tightened his grip on the spyglass. Another one of his decisions had gone astray. He should have never allowed William to go and locked him in the brig instead. Sean clapped him on his back and his other hand squeezed his shoulder. "Hey, Captain, you got us here." Kane stiffened. "You doubted my ability?" "Nay, Capt'n, cutting it close, too close. Tonight's the full moon." Kane gripped the spyglass tighter and gritted his teeth. "I'm well aware of the curse, Mallory." Sean cleared his throat. "`Tis only William on the dock." "Aye," Kane muttered. "Ronan would never have left him. Something's a miss." "Orders Capt'n," Sean asked. "Go and fetch my brother, " Kane said. He lowered the spyglass. "Aye, aye, Captain." Sean strutted away. "Lower the longboat mates," he hollered. The full moon was indeed approaching. Kane's tongue rolled over his sharpened incisors and his blood slowed. Kane tilted his head from side to side, stretching out the kinks in his neck. Bloody hell. He slammed the spyglass back into his belt. Tonight, he'd be no better than Palmer--a vampire. He chewed on his cheek. His fondness for Hannah was growing and he didn't need a distraction. He had to protect his men and find a cure to the curse. But every time he was around her, he acted as thick as a stone. What would she think if she found out he was a monster? He had to get the lass off his ship. He wanted her to remember him as a man, not a bloody monster. He closed his eyes and hung his head. Even now the moon called to him. His throat ached. His stomach growled. Damn, the bloodlust was upon him again, deeper than any human food could satisfy. He didn't want Hannah to discover the truth, to see the fear in her eyes, to see the loathing, to see the hate. William strolled up next to him. He opened his arms. "Brother." Kane returned the bear hug and held him tight. His tension lessened. He released William and slapped his back. "Grand to have you on board, brother." "We need to talk." "Aye," Kane agreed. "Macmillan?" William shook his head. "We had just left Shark's Tavern when Palmer's men ambushed us. Ronan and I fought, but they took him." "And?" "They said if you want him, come and get him." Kane clenched his fist. "Fine. I'll kill the bloody bastard. Wha..." "Capt'n," the topman cried from the crow's nest. "On the starboard side. 'Tis the Fiery Damsel." Kane aimed his spyglass at the Fiery Damsel, Palmer's colors of a red skeleton on a black background flapping in the wind framed up in the glass. The Fiery Damsel sailed straight toward them, cannons ready, but at the last minute, they changed course and came up behind them. Ronan was aboard the bloody ship, locked in the damn brig. Palmer would enjoy torturing him, listening to him scream. With Ronan being immortal, Palmer could indulge his every fantasy and wait for Ronan to heal, only to hurt him all over again. Kane refused to abandon him. "Weigh anchor. Clap on the sails." Men scrambled to loosen and spread more sail in order to get the Phoenix on her way and increase her speed. Kane narrowed his eyes. "Fall off, Mallory. The bastard's coming behind the stern." The Soaring Phoenix turned to sail with the wind and pick up speed to engage the Fiery Damsel, but even as Mallory spun the wheel, the Phoenix failed to maneuver fast enough. The Fiery Damsel fired, smoke flowing around her hull. Cannonballs splashed into the water, spraying droplets onto the Phoenix's deck. The helmsman grabbed the wheel, turning to the ship to a hard port. "She's coming about." He struggled with the stubborn wheel while the rudder slowly turned. A loud blast shook the ship. A cannonball slammed into the chaser, the cannon at the stern. Bits of shot fell, tearing away wood, sails and flesh. Two of Kane's men screamed and toppled into the water. Fire broke out on the stern. Black smoke swirled around the Phoenix's hull. "Man the guns," Kane cried. He ran to the bow and pulled out his spyglass. Ronan was nowhere to be seen. Damn it! The Fiery Damsel closed the distance and fired. Another cannonball hit the Soaring Phoenix's hull and the ship rocked. Kane's crew ran to the guns and manned their stations. Men poured gunpowder into a parchment and placed it in the hole while other crewmen took a rammer and shoved it down. The cannonball was placed inside the gun followed by another wad stuffed into the hole to keep the cannonball from rolling out. The front of the gun carriage was placed on the ship's bulwark and Kane clenched his fist. Too long. Too long. "Fire," he cried. The cannons fired and missed the Fiery Damsel's hull. She still outmaneuvered them. Another cannonball hit the Phoenix and she rocked in the water. Kane's men were hit and fell screaming into the water. A fire broke out on the deck, the oily black smoke snaking around the ship and obscuring the action. Kane coughed and his eyes watered. He spun around and turned still as stone. Through the haze of the smoke, Hannah walked across the deck. His heart slammed into his chest, blood thumping through him. She needed to be safe. He would not lose her. He ran towards her, his heart thumping in his chest, pushing man after man out his way. Smoke blurred his vision and he skidded on a piece of hemp rope. He wobbled and went down on one knee but got back up and ran as he saw her too close to the rail, facing the Fiery Damsel, as if she were ready to engage in battle. Hannah stared at the Fiery Damsel and squared her shoulders back. Grim determination flickered over her face. The blood drained from his face and he grew dizzy. For Jaaysus sake, what was she doing? Kane dodged running crewmen and shards of wood, and wounded men. All that mattered was Hannah and getting her below deck. At another cannon blast from the Fiery Damsel, he shouted, "Shite, Hannah, get below deck!" Hannah held up her palms, facing the Fiery Damsel. She yelled over the thundering cannons. "Stay back. I know what I'm doing." Despite the clear blue sky and a calm sea, her brown hair churned around her face, her shirt and trousers rippled over her slender form. She raised her arms into the air and a wall of water rose out of the sea. She pointed to the burning stern and a stream of water splashed dousing the flames on the Soaring Phoenix's stern. Droplets of water sprinkled onto Kane's body. He gaped at steam rising from the stern. Had she just commanded water to move? Hannah bent her body, and as she slowly stood, she moved her hands back towards her shoulders. Another wet wall formed, this one higher than the last, the roar hurting Kane's ears. She lunged her hands forward, and the wet wall followed the direction of her arms and thundered towards the Fiery Damsel. Kane's crew yelled, but he couldn't make out their words due to the thundering wave. It crashed into the Fiery Damsel, nearly tipping over the ship. The water rolled up and down, tossing the Fiery Damsel, further and further and further out to sea. Her sails were tattered and flapped, helpless against the mast. "Mother of God," he murmured. Kane wanted to hunt the Fiery Damsel down and finish her, kill Palmer, but tonight was the full moon. His men needed to feed. His attention ripped back to Hannah as the disabled ship limped away. Her arms dropped to her side and she fell to her knees, her hair hanging in her face. She sank to her knees, her hand shaking as she swiped her limp hair out of her face. Blood trickled down her nose, but a smile spread across her face. She panted, "I can't believe I did it." Kane glanced at the
 disappearing Fiery Damsel and Hannah. He narrowed his eyes and marched over to her. He grabbed her arm. "Bloody hell, you're a witch."
 

Hannah's eyes widened and struggled against him. "Don't hurt me." Kane yanked her across the deck. His men stepped back, giving them a wide birth. Some stood slack-jawed, some wide-eyed, still others scowled and grimaced. The brave put their hands on their scabbards, ready to draw their weapons and slice her to ribbons. "Let." She slapped his hand. "Go." Another slap. "Of." Slap, slap. "Me." Slap, slap. She kicked his shins, but Kane could care less. He wanted her alone. He dragged her past a glowering William. "Kane," William warned. He folded his arms across his chest and tapped his foot. Even in his tattered wet clothes, he would have made a grand bishop with his stiff stance and condescending scowl. "Stay here, William," Kane glared. "That's an order." "I don't--" "I am the bloody captain. You'll do my bidding brother or be locked in the brig." "Where are you taking me?" Hannah demanded. "To my cabin." "What? Why?" She jammed her heel onto his boot. "I demand you release me at once." He pulled her against his chest and peered into her stormy brown eyes. Her intoxicating smell of jasmine rushed over him, enslaving him in a pool of conflicting emotions. Her squirming body pressed against him teased his growing passion. He gazed at her frowning soft lips and an urge to kiss her, to silence her protests, swept over him. Was the little minx casting a spell? Or had she already cast one? One of desire, lust and need. "Release me." "You lied to me." He narrowed his eyes, forcing back his passion. "Witch." "What? I am...." Before she could finish, he hauled her down to his cabin and tossed her inside. She stumbled and whirled around. Her stormy eyes declared war on him. He slammed the door shut behind them. "How dare you! You bastard." He put his hands on his hips. "You're not leaving this cabin." "Why not?" "Why not? You're a witch and put my men at risk." "Excuse me?" She put her hands on her hips. "Unless I am completely daft, the Fiery Damsel was about to tear this ship apart." He stuck out his chin. "You're mistaken." He took a step towards her. Hannah glared. Blood trickling out of her right nostril. "You've got a bloody nose." Even with a bleeding nose and a battered face, she was beautiful, a vision of beauty, but was she from heaven or hell? "Yes." She ran her sleeve over her nose, smearing the blood on her shirt. "I can see that." She stomped over to the bed and sat. "So, if you are going to beat me, get it over with." "Beat you?" He stilled. "Is that..." She tilted her chin. "Yes, if you must know. Father beats me when I use my power." "The lashes?" "Yes, damn it." He blinked. Her chest heaved up and down. What kind of a man was her father? "I'm finally able to save someone with my powers, and I'm punished for it. You are no different than my father. Your crew would have been dead without me. I'm not a witch and I don't cast spells." She flopped on her stomach and lifted the back of her shirt. "So, get it over with. I don't care. Your crew would have been dead without me." Slowly unfolding his arms, he edged over to the bed. She jerked her head away, her shoulders shaking. Was she crying? Her back was stiff. Her hair covered her shoulders and her upper back, but failed to hide the faded angry red lashes and scarring her back. He had half inclination to march down to the brig and whip the flesh from her father's bulbous body. How many times had he beaten her? Was it for using her powers or failing to use them? Gazing at her naked back, his fingers itched to run over her silky skin and make her forget the pain, to let her know her body was to be worshiped, to be kissed. He gritted his teeth. Damn, he was losing control. He sat on the bed and Hannah sucked in her breath. "How long have you possessed this power?" "Why do you care?" "Tell me lass." He lifted his hand to move the hair out of her face, but she turned her head. "I was born with it. My ancestor was a gypsy queen who possessed magical powers and could move objects with her mind. I told you we don't cast spells." She sighed. "Just get it over with Kane." He clasped her shoulder and gently turned her around. Her wet doe eyes studied him warily. He wanted to erase her pain, get her to trust him. He wrapped his arm around her and pulled her to the edge of the bed. "Your father despises your powers?" "Yes." Her voice choked. "For not being able to use them properly. Because of me, my mother died." "Your father blames you?" Tears misted in her eyes. Her nod was almost imperceptible. "But why?" "I...I..." She stammered, looked away. Her jasmine scent drifted over him, weeding away at his control. She was in pain. Bloody hell, why was he pushing her to talk about this? 'Twas cruel, but he had to know for the safety of his crew. "What did you do?" "Carriages," she whispered. "Carriages?" "Runaway horses." She knotted her fingers together in her lap. He frowned. "Runaway horses were pulling a carriage?" "Lightning struck a tree. The horses spooked and took off running. The carriages came barreling down--" Her voice faded. She closed her eyes. Kane's heart wrenched. Poor lass, she must feel so responsible. Hell, he would. "We had been shopping. I had gone with my father to the sweet shop, while my mother went across the street to the millinery. She wanted a new hat to wear to my aunt's ball." A sick feeling settled low in Kane's stomach. "Ah, Hannah." "Kane," she whimpered. "I was eating a licorice whip when my mother spied us. She was wearing a jaunty green hat decorated with white ribbon. She waved to us, started across the street..." "Then came the carriages." She gulped visibly. Closed her eyes. Her breath came in short, shallow gasps. "The horses were upon her." Kane put up a hand to smooth down her hair. She leaned against his shoulder and opened her eyes. "My father yelled, "Do not just stand there. Do something with those abominable powers of yours! Save your mother!" "I tried to make the carriages turn in a different direction. But they were coming so fast. So very fast. And I was so slow." "Shhh," he soothed. "You don't need to say anything more." She stared blankly ahead as if she were back in the moment. "The one thing that sticks with me is that silly green hat with the white ribbon lying smashed in the road." He heard a muffled sob. He frowned. "How old were you when she died?" "Seven," she murmured. The bloody Sassenach. The bastard had been abusing her since she was seven. He gave into temptation and moved her hair. "Is that what you want me to do? Beat you?" "That's what father always does. Why would you be any different?" "Because I'm not him." He clasped her shirt and pulled it down, covering her marks. She tensed beneath his touch. "I promise I won't hurt you, lass." She flicked her hair and rolled onto her back and stared up at him. Confusion clouded her eyes. "Why not? I could see by your face and your crew's that you hate witches. Witches cast spells. I don't. I'm descended from a gypsy queen." "Aye, so you're not a witch. You're a gypsy. A beautiful one." Her eyes widened, but not with fear. Gratitude filled them. They were alive with so much emotion, alive with a need, a hunger and an intensity that scorched the last of his resolve. She moistened her lips. "Kiss me." His iron will crumbled. She wanted him. He groaned. He wanted to devour her mouth and then slowly remove her clothes, licking and tasting her naked flesh. But for now, he would have to be satisfied with a kiss. He stared at her pliable lips. Closing his eyes, he captured her lips and pushed them apart, wanting to taste her. Her hands slid up his chest and she pulled him closer to her. His kiss became harder, passionate, demanding. He wanted to remember what she tasted like, savor this moment. Bloody hell, what had the lass done to him? Where was the man with the all the answers, the man with the perfect plan? Her fingers slid around his neck and she pulled him down, holding him against her. He could hear her blood rushing through her veins and her heart beat against his chest. He didn't know whose was louder, his or hers. This lassie clouded his every judgment. Rather than hunting down Palmer and finding a cure, his thoughts focused on her, her lips, her curvy body, her soft feminine scent. She matched his fervor and her kiss was as desperate as his. She slid her fingers through his hair and he groaned. Tingles rushed over his back and he shivered. He wanted more of her, wanted to listen to her cry out his name, to hear her moan. He slid his hand up her shirt and she trembled. His hand clasped her breast and toyed with her nipple. She moaned, fanning his desire. The monster within him wanted her. All of her. No matter the cost. Who the hell was he fooling? 'Twasn't just the vampire demanding to explore her secrets. He hungered for her, to feed on her to satisfy his every wicked impulse. He left her lips and kissed the edge of her mouth, moving toward her slender neck. Her blood pulsed in her veins. His tongue rolled over his elongated fangs. He kissed her neck and scraped her neck with his fangs. He wanted to stop but the monster within him wanted her, wanted to taste her coppery liquid to see if 'twas as sweet as the recesses of her mouth. Someone pounded on the door. "Capt'n." Kane licked her skin, putting his mouth on her flesh, he sucked hard. Every impulse demanded he bite her, but he fought back, only allowing himself to suck her skin as a man, not as a vampire.  10 Hannah groaned as Kane slowly released her and peered down at her. She couldn't take her eyes off his wicked lips and wanted him to kiss her. He pushed her hair behind her ear. "You're so beautiful lass." She trembled as his fingers brushed over her skin, his dark eyes holding her captive. "I've a surprise for you." He bent over and brushed his lips over hers again. She parted her mouth to deepen the kiss,
 but Kane pulled away and stood. Hannah sighed. "I'll return shortly." Her fingers touched her bruised lips, sensitive skin throbbing from where his stubble rubbed against her. Feeling like a harlot, she straightened her skewed shirt and covered her exposed breasts. "Where are you going?" "You'll see, lass." A wicked gleam formed in his eye and he quickly exited. Hannah rushed over to the mirror. Her disheveled hair, puffy lips and red neck revealed her shame. What had she been doing? If Kane hadn't pulled away, she'd not have stopped him, kissing, indulging in his spicy taste. She wanted more. So much more. To have him take her places where she had never dreamed of going. She crossed her arms across her chest. What was she thinking? He was a pirate. She barely knew him, yet, she let him take liberties with her that no other man dared. Aboard this ship, she was his for the taking? Had her powers taken a darker side? On his ship, she used her powers more than she had in her entire life. Were there more to her powers than moving objects? Did they ignite sensual feelings for her or was it Kane? Hannah straightened her hair and tucked her shirt into her trousers. Why was she so attracted to him? She had never experienced these feelings before and couldn't even name the emotions swarming around her. The door swung open and she jumped as Kane strolled in with Cook just behind him. The aroma of hot food infiltrated the cabin and her stomach growled. Her mouth watered. She hadn't realized how hungry she was until she smelled Cook's latest creations. Cook brushed past her carrying a tray loaded with a platter piled with sliced salted pork, steaming mashed potatoes and a bottle of Chianti wine. Kane gave a slight bow. "We were to feast tonight. 

The ragtag sailing ship sped toward them in a thirty knot tailwind, the black flag flapping from the main mast. Pirates! Twenty-year-old Hannah's stomach tightened as the rogue ship chased them. "Miss," Sally whispered. Hannah's maid, and constant companion, bit her lip and stared, her eyes wide at the pursuing frigate. "What if they overtake us?" "We haven't lost yet, Sally." Hannah prayed they would be mistaken for cabin boys. She prayed the bindings restraining their breasts and their drooping breeches that hid their curves were convincing. She prayed they would escape her father's warning of the rape and torture of female captives. A cannonball sailed through the air and smashed into the Dolphin's second mast, splintering wood. Sally clutched Hannah's arm, digging her fingers into her flesh, and screaming. Large holes shattered and ripped the topsails of the Dutch flute ship. Fragments of wood crashed into the black sea, splashing water onto the portside. The smell of burning wood ignited a stream of heat down Hannah's spine. She coughed and her eyes burned. The pirate ship's long gun fired. Canister shot flew through the air. A sailor shrieked. His face blackened and bloody, he twirled around on the deck and fell over the side into the dark ocean. The frigate pursued the slower Dolphin through the black smoke. The flute sailed at twenty knots, her top speed, but the frigate skipped across the moonlight water, closing the gap fast. Cannons fired. Bar shot flew through the air, knocking three men into the water. Screams of pain, cracks of guns, splitting of wood, filled Hannah's ears. "Hannah," her father yelled. "Get below deck. Now." Ignoring her father's order, she gripped the railing and waited, praying they could out maneuver the pirates. "Make ready the guns," the Dolphin's boatswain, John Vane ordered. His brown hair had fallen loose from his queue and spilled over his broad shoulders. At over six feet tall John never had to repeat an order. He unsheathed his cutlass, his hazel eyes trained upon the enemy. Dolphin's gunners were surprisingly synchronized. Men rammed cartridges down the cannon, packing the charge tight into the chamber. Other crewmen rolled the cannonball down the muzzle. Hemp rope was stuffed in to keep the cannonball from rolling out. After priming the cannons, the men waited for a rolling wave and John's order. "Fire," he commanded. The cannons roared, jolting the ship. Cannonballs hit the vast frigate's haul, but she failed to veer away. Sweat pouring down his temples, her father, Captain Justin Knight, peered through his spyglass. "Damn! It didn't even slow her down." Her father never swore. Biting her lip, Hannah gripped the railing, her arms shaking. The crew held swords and pistols at the ready as the frigate grew closer. Hannah wished her father hadn't forbidden her a weapon. She desperately desired the security of her own cutlass or sword or pike, even if she had no idea how to use one. On the frigate, shipboard cannon returned fire, the loud boom racking her ears. She winced. Musket balls and lead pellets hurled through the air. Two crewmen staggered and fell on the deck, their blood staining the wet wood. A chunk of burning timber crashed onto the deck beside her. Fire burst out, lighting up the midnight sky. Swelling smoke snaked around the ship. Men threw buckets of water onto the flames--to no avail. The roaring blaze quickly dissolved into steam. The crew was running out of water, out of buckets and out of time. Grandmother's voice whispered in Hannah's mind. You can help them. Block out every sound. Concentrate my dear. Control your fear. Although Grandmother had been dead over a year, her voice would echo in Hannah's ear and push her to conjure up her power to move objects with her mind. She never saw Grandmother's ghost, but her voice was real, clear, strong. Her sisters didn't possess the ability, didn't want the ability and didn't need to fight for their father's love. Grandmother said Hannah was blessed. Blessed wasn't what her father alleged. "I can help." Hannah stared at Sally as she removed her clinging fingers. Sally nodded, her lower lip trembling. "But your father." "I know." Hannah bit her lip and rubbed her shaking palms on her breeches. She'd be breaking her father's most steadfast rule--never reveal her cursed power. Her backside ached and the welts had yet to fade from the last time she broke his rule. Chills rushed through her at defying him. A wave rushed over the Dolphin, carrying away a sailor. He bobbed up and down screaming in the ocean. Hannah blocked out the screams and sounds of cannon fire and stared at a rope. Her power swirled inside her, spreading tingles over her. One end of the rope flung into the sea, encircled the shrieking man and yanked him back on board. Her father stormed across the deck. "You foolish girl, John would have saved him. I forbid you to use your power aboard my ship again. Or the next time, I swear I'll sell you off as an indentured servant and send you to the Americas." He grabbed her arm and shook her. "Do you hear me?" "Yes," she murmured. Her grandparents and mother were dead. No one would stop him. What choice did she have but to obey? He narrowed his eyes. "No, I think you need something to remember my warning." He threw her up against the railing and thrashed her lower back. She cried out. "Captain," a male voice yelled. "Don't do it again," her father hissed in her ear and stormed off. Hannah rubbed her backside and blinked back tears. What choice did she have? She had to try and save their crew. Father would punish her again. If they survived... She braced her shoulders and refused to give into her panic. Ignore the fear. Ignore the fear. Ignore the fear. Closing her eyes, Hannah inhaled and drew on her power. Her heart fluttered and her body prickled. Slowing her breath, she opened her eyes, blocked out the screams around her and faced the ocean, palms out. A blowing wind of energy left her hands. Hair swirled around her face and her shirt billowed and her breeches flapped. Using her power to dip into the ocean and create a steady stream of water, she spun the stream into a twirling funnel. "The waves," one of the crewmen yelled. "Blimey. Look out!" Droplets of seawater fell onto her face and hands. The funnel splashed onto the deck, sucking up the flames. Steam coiled through the ship. The crewmen stared at her owl-eyed. She half smiled. For once, her powers worked. Wetness trickled out of her nose and into her mouth. She moistened her lips. There was no mistake--blood. Damn, a bloody nose. The wind died. Her hair fell limp across her shoulders and her overlarge shirt and breeches sagged onto her small frame. The funnel waned into a tiny shower of rain and dissolved. As her power diminished, she dropped her aching arms to her side and caught her breath. "Hannah." Her father yelled her name like an expletive. She jumped. Her father approached, his pewter gray eyes narrowed. Wind blew his salt and pepper black hair around his scowling face. He grabbed her arm and bit his fingers into her flesh. She winced. "What did I tell you about using your accursed power?" "I...I...I wanted to help." His punishing scowl sent her blood thumping through her veins. "We haven't lost yet. Now..." "She's gonna break," Spencer Billings, the rope maker cried. Her father released her. The large main mast that gave the ship all its speed, snapped and swayed, tattered white sails swinging overhead. The ship rocked, dangerously from side to side, water sloshed up on the deck, crewmen slamming onto the portside rail. Hannah froze. The ship was perishing. Another cannonball crashed into the portside, the ship groaned and shuddered. Hannah bumped into her father's stomach. He grabbed her arms, fear reflected in his eyes. The broken mast and sails collapsed into the water. The dying ship groaned as it tilted sharply to the starboard side. The ship moaned and moaned and moaned. Hannah slipped on the canted deck and smashed into the mast. Stunned, she shook her head. You can do this. Focus, my dear, focus. Sweat trickled down her back. Hannah wiped her hot face on her sleeve. Despite the rising heat, she shivered as she crawled to her feet, clinging to the broken mast. If only Grandmother was there, offering her encouraging words, coaxing her on how to draw on her power. But Grandmother was dead. Hannah pictured Grandmother standing next to her in her favorite green gown embroidered with gold and silver beads, bracelets dangling from her wrists. Long, white hair pulled into a soft bun. Her green eyes had always captivated her. In the sunlight, her eyes lightened and turned bluish-green while in the moonlight, her eyes darkened to an emerald. "Believe in yourself, Hannah," Grandmother had always said. Holding onto Grandmother's words, Hannah's surging power sent sweeping tingles through her limbs. She held up her hands, palms facing the dangling broken mask, and sails floating in the black ocean. Her hair swept around her face and her energy flowed once again, her shirt and breeches rippling around her. Energy swirled away, forming a whirlwind of air that spun around the mast. Bits of wood and splinters slammed back into the cracked mast. The wavering beam lifted away from the railing, dragging the sails out of the ocean. Another cannonball crashed into the portside. Hannah jolted and fell flat onto the deck. Her concentration broke. The mast snapped, spun half away around and crashed onto the railing, splashing back into the water. A jagged crack split the middle of the ship, the bow dipping lower into the ocean. "No," she half-choked. Perspiration
 dripped down her forehead. Her heart pounded. With each beat, the tingling in her numb fingertips lessened as the power receded. She swiped trickling blood from her nose. A strong hand yanked her off the deck and she gazed into her father's menacing glare. "You failed. Again." Her lower lip trembled and she blinked back tears of failure and fear. He shook his head and released her as if he couldn't bear to touch her. The fire's glow glistened off the heavy gold rings, adorning his fat clenched fingers. "Capt'n, they're here," Spencer yelled. "'Tis the Fiery Damsel." "I can see, you half-wit," her father shouted. Hannah swallowed. The bowsprit, headed right for them, but rather than ramming them, the ship edged closer, coming parallel. "Prepare to be boarded." John bellowed. Pirates waved swords over their heads and shook their fists. "Prepare to die," they jeered. Crackling flames shined on their merciless faces. She gasped. Had she imagined it? Was the moonlight and fire playing tricks? She shook her head and stared again. No, it couldn't be. No man had glowing red eyes. The Dolphin's crew drew their swords and aimed pistols. John yelled, "Death to pirates." "Damn it, Hannah," her father clutched her arm. "We are all dead, thanks to you." Hannah slumped and hung her head. Why did her powers fail her when she needed them most? "Hannah, they're coming." Sally clutched Hannah and pulled her towards the stern. "We have got to get out of here. Oh my Lord, what are they?" "Aft boarders," a voice shouted. Pirates swung grappling hooks, latching onto and pulling the sinking Dolphin toward their ship. Fists and swords lifted high overhead, the pirates jumped across the railings and landed on the deck. The Dolphin swayed and a crack split wider. Sharp jagged planks lifted into the air. Hannah took a step backwards. Red eyes glaring, the marauders opened their mouths, the flames exposing sharp pointed teeth. Her heart quickened, blood thumping between her temples. What the hell were they? "To the death," John yelled. Blood and gunpowder smeared his cheeks and his once white shirt. He waved his sword over his head and gripped a pistol in his other hand. The crew followed him. Hannah grabbed one of the Dolphin's wooden belaying pins, determined to bash in a pirate's head. John charged the first pirates. Bald and more than a foot shorter than John, a pirate advanced, his gut hanging over his breeches. The pirate aimed his pistol, but John fired first, hitting the man in the chest. He flew backwards, landing flat on his back. Another taller and muscular marauder jumped in front of John and their swords clashed. John lunged, forcing the pirate against the railing. The fallen pirate sat up, a red trail leaking down the middle of his chest and onto the deck of the ship. He jumped to his feet and Hannah blinked. She shook her head to free it from the fogging effects of the smoke. Had she just seen him jump or had he floated off the deck? The fiend or pirate or monster--whatever ’twas lunged for John. "John, watch out," Hannah yelled, but a cannon blast blocked out her voice. The bald man seized John's neck and jerked him backwards, lifting him off his feet. John stabbed the man in the thigh, but the fiend held on to John, snatching a fistful of John's hair, and yanked, stretching, exposing his neck. The fiend opened his mouth wide, biting into John's throat with his sharp teeth. A squirting stream of crimson splattered onto the wet deck. The other pirate knocked John's sword out of his flailing hand, but with his other hand, John fired his pistol, hitting the man in the chest. The man snarled and seized John's wrist. He tore into the flesh with his teeth, knocking the pistol out of John's hand. John struggled, his free hand pushed on the bald man's chin, but to Hannah's horror, John's eyes closed and his hand fell limp to his side. Sally screamed and ran for the stern. "Sally," Hannah tried to grab her frightened maid, but failed. Something whisked over Hannah's head. Long coats billowing behind them, two pirates descended onto Sally. One landed in front of her and put his hands on his narrow hips. He tossed his dark head back and laughed. Sally whipped around only to be caught short by another broad shouldered blond pirate, who grabbed her. Her hat fell to her side and her long blonde tresses fell loose. "Ah, a woman," he sneered. "Is your last name Knight?"

Sally shrieked as he yanked her close to chest. "Answer me, bitch," he snarled. Hannah gripped the belaying pin tighter in her hand. She took a step closer and opened her mouth to point out the bastard's mistake, but a strong hand covered her lips and grabbed her waist. She stomped on a foot, slammed the wooden pin down on a thigh and received a muffled curse. She knew the voice and shrank. Her father hissed, "Stupid girl,--'tis me. Stop struggling. Don't say a word. They're hunting us. They want to take us to their leader Zu something." She stiffened. Why would anyone be hunting them? Who is this Zu person? "Let me go," Sally pounded her fists on the pirate's chest. "No, I'm Sally. Please leave me alone. Release me." "Then die," he said and bent his head down. Her small hands pushed on the man's chest. The other pirate caught Hannah's eye, an evil smile spreading across his face. He nodded in her direction and marched toward them. He opened his mouth. Moonlight glittered off rows of shark's teeth. Hunger reflected in those eyes. Death rushed toward them. Her father pushed her to the side and aimed his pistol at him. She raised the pin, her hand trembling. "Run," a male voice ordered. Behind them, Spencer aimed the long gun and fired. The cannonball soared through the air and collided into the dark hair pirate, knocking him into the water. Spencer's terrified yell grabbed Hannah's attention. She turned. Two pirates had dragged him to the ground. One bit into his neck, while the other fed on his arm. "Help me," Spencer moaned, his eyes pleading. Hannah inhaled deeply, air filling her lungs. She swallowed hard. The power swelled inside her as she stared at the long gun. She lifted one hand and aimed it at the gun while the other clutched the pin. The same flutter pounded in her chest, her fingers tingled. A white light swirled around the long gun, inching it around and aiming at the pirate sucking on Spencer's arm. Her father grabbed her arm. "Hold your breath." "What? No, please..." Her father dragged her to the railing and tossed her over. Arms and legs kicking, she plunged into the churning black water. Salt burned her eyes. Cold gripped her and her clothes pulled her down. She gulped more and more and more seawater. She kicked her legs hard and skimmed her arms back and forth over the churning surface, trying to keep her head above the water. She grabbed a piece of wreckage and clung to its splintered surface. Bits of burning wood fell into the water. The fiery ship cast an eerie glow onto the water. Hannah and her father swam into the shadow of the hull. Death shrieks from the crew tore at her heart and she bit back a sob. What had Father done? She could have saved Spencer. Spencer had risked his life to save them. He was her friend and didn't deserve to die. Her fingers clutched the wood. She wanted to help and her father stopped her. Why? Didn't he care about his crew? Her father swam toward her, gripping a piece of drifting wood. Glaring at him, she spat out seawater. "Why didn't you let me save him?" He narrowed his eyes. "Because you'd have failed." She turned away and swallowed hard, tears filling in her eyes. The familiar hollow pain in her chest sucked away her breath. Her father's lack of faith in her cut her deep. He bragged about her two older sisters, Theresa and Jessica, about their marriages, their God fearing life, but when it came to her, he never uttered one word of praise. "But...," she stammered. "Are you daft girl? The pirates were searching for us. They knew our name." Her teeth chattered. "How did they know our names?" "I have no idea," he grumbled. Bubbles formed near the bowline, and Hannah held her breath. A dark head peered out of the water. But how could it be? Spencer had shot him and he'd fallen overboard. The bastard should be dead. The man tossed his head back, his wet hair slapping behind him. As he flew into the air, he transformed into a large bat. The size of a muskrat, he had webbed wings, smooth pointed ears and a flattened and pushed up snout. He spun around and around, screeching. He flew high into the air and circled the glowing moon. Hannah covered her mouth and bit her palm, and lost her grip on the drifting wood and slipped into the cold ocean. Sucking in water, her lungs burned. She kicked her feet and burst out of the water. Spitting out the sea, she reached for the driftwood and scanned the sky. The flying bat pirate descended onto the ship. Terrified screams echoed as the marauders tossed dead crew men over the side. Bodies fell, slapping water and pushing Hannah around. Tears slipped down her cheeks. Her lips trembled. She should have held onto the mast and repaired it, giving them a chance to maneuver the ship, instead of giving into her fear. More bats circled the ship. Flames rose high, illuminating the ocean. Any minute the bastards would spot her and her father. A cannonball hit the second mast and it broke into two. A piece of the mast rushed toward her father. "Father," she yelled. He glanced up and tried to swim, but the mast hit him with a solid thump. A splatter of blood smearing on his right temple, he slumped over the piece of wood. Something bumped into her leg under the water. She hung onto her piece of floating wood, afraid to move as a gray fin glided across the water and edged close to a dead crewman. Sharks. Either way, she had condemned herself and her father to a gruesome death. With a stained dark shirt and blood on his chin, a pirate grabbed a mooring line, stood on the railing of the frigate and pointed. "Capt'n, 'tis the Soaring Phoenix." Another ship sailed toward them. Was it pirates or a rescue?  2 Captain Kane O'Brien peered through his spyglass aboard the deck of the Soaring Phoenix. "Bloody hell." The waxing moon and blazing firelight lit up the black ocean. The cursed Fiery Damsel loomed over a burning, half submerged flute ship, slowly circling its broken mast. Water spilled into cannonball-size holes. Fire licked the white sails, and wood crackled and snapped. He gritted his teeth. A red-headed giant towered over the terrified sailors. His beard hid his face and his eyes burned red. Quinton Palmer. The sailors had the same look of horror when he met Palmer. 'Twas during the Irish Confederate War. He'd have been sixteen years old, a whelp, when Quinton Palmer forced him to become a man. Kane's hero had always been his father, Finn O'Brien, an honorable and courageous man. And Finn O'Brien relished freedom. When the British approached their home town of Wexford, burning their fields and homes, taking their livestock and raping their women, Finn rallied the men in the village to fight. Kane and his father had hid behind an overturned wagon. Shells exploded around them. Kane shrank. Smoke stung his eyes. He peered around a spinning wagon wheel. An Irish setter limped out onto the road. A beast of British soldier, Palmer, held a bayonet in his hand and a sick smile crossed his face. Ten years old, Michael O'Shay, ran over to the dog, screaming. He wrapped his arms around the dying dog's neck. Palmer stabbed little Michael in the shoulder. Michael yelped, releasing the dog. Blood streamed down his chest. The dog snapped and growled. Palmer flicked the bayonet, slicing the dog's throat and the animal collapsed onto the road, blood pooling around him. Palmer's cruelty had sickened Kane and bile rose up his throat. He gripped his sword, but his legs refused to move. His heart pounded and sweat drenched his back. "Kane," his father ordered. "I want you to remain here. Do you hear me, lad?" He gripped Kane's shoulder and shook him. Kane nodded as shells exploded around them, ringing his ears. Kane had swallowed his fright. "Aye, Pa." Raising a cutlass over his head, Finn O'Brien charged Palmer. Palmer took a step back, but whipped out his pistol and fired. His father staggered, but regained his step. Palmer was almost a head taller than his father, but Finn O'Brien never shied away from a fight. Palmer fired again, but this time, his father spun around and fell on his knees. Palmer raised his bayonet. Kane had forgotten his fear. He screamed a war cry, running with his sword high over his head. But his legs failed to move fast enough. The blasts of cannons blocked out his yells. Sweat dripped in his eyes and bile burned in his gut. Staring at Kane, Palmer stabbed his father in the heart. His father fell onto his back, his eyes staring into the sky. Palmer smiled, threw his bayonet onto Kane's father's lifeless body and jerked out his sword. He lunged, knocking Kane's sword out of his hand and grabbing his hair. He threw Kane down next to his dead father and raised his sword. Kane sucked in his breath. He was dead. "Something to remember me by boy," Palmer promised. He slashed Kane's face. Pain slid over him. He'd never forgotten Palmer's promise, or his cruelty, or his smile. Kane fingered his bumpy scar on his left cheek. Hate boiled inside him as Palmer spoke to a man. The terrified lad shook his head. Angered, Palmer slammed the man into the nearest mast. The poor fellow slapped at Palmer's hands, but Palmer crooked the man's head to the side and sank his bloodstained teeth into his throat. Kane shoved the spy glass back into his breeches. "What the devil are you up to Palmer?" "Och, may the devil take Palmer, but I don't have to tell you that Capt'n." Kane's best friend and boatswain, Sean Mallory, slapped the railing. He'd been with Kane through the Irish Confederate War. Despite his angelic face and long blond hair, his towering stature intimidated Sassenachs, like an avenging archangel. "He wants something." "How do you know?" Kane gritted his teeth. "Because Palmer never asks his victims anything before he kills them. Prepare to board 'er. Ready the guns." "Aye, aye, Capt'n," Sean called over his shoulders. "Ready the guns. Prepare
 to board 'er." Footsteps pounded on the deck as Kane's crew rushed to their stations. Kane gripped the bow railing. Acid pitted in his gut. "Revenge is mine, Palmer." The Soaring Phoenix sailed steadfast and true, the crew ready to board the Fiery Damsel. Kane pulled out his sword and pistol. "Fire!" Kane shouted as the Soaring Phoenix closed in on the Fiery Damsel. Cannons thundered and hit the hull of the Damsel's starboard side. The circling bats sped towards the Phoenix, but then landed on the Damsel, changing back into men. "Ahoy, Capt'n, off the starboard bow. 'Tis a lad and a man!" Amadi shouted. Kane glanced up at the crow's nest where Amadi pointed. Night or day, he swore Amadi possessed eagle eyes whether man or vampire. Amadi pointed at some broken wood, but Kane peered closer. Two figures clutched two pieces of drift wood. Palmer must be losing his touch. Palmer ran to the side of the sinking ship. He jumped into the air and dove toward the man and the lad. Without thinking, Kane called upon his vampire powers, leaped into the air and the condensing sensation of his body shrinking, his muscles contracting and his bones shortening, shot through him. Kane's arms transformed into wings, his vision grew keener, and his body shifted into a large bat. Lucky he was able to transform. Sometimes the waxing moon allowed him to use his vampire powers. If it had been a crescent moon or a half moon, he'd never been able to call forth his powers and the victims would be good as dead. Although he was immortal, he didn't have the ability to fight Palmer when Palmer was at full strength. "Capt'n," Amadi yelled. "No." More crewmen joined in the protest, but Kane ignored them. He wanted to foil Palmer's bloodlust. He sped toward Palmer. The lad ducked under water, but the larger, swag-bellied man remained slumped over a piece of wood. Inches away from the man, Palmer skimmed the water and soared into the sky. As he whirled around, Kane collide with him, wrapping his wings around Palmer's body, trapping Palmer's wings. Kane bit the back of Palmer's neck. Palmer screeched and arched his back, but Kane held on. The ocean, night sky and ships swirled around as they plunged into the warm water the way sea eagles clash over prey. Palmer arched again and broke free. He whirled around and bit Kane's wing, tearing his flesh. Pain seized Kane and he sucked in sea water. Palmer soared out of the water. Ignoring the blinding pain, Kane darted into the air and pursued him. Cannons thundered. A cannonball whisked towards him. Kane darted to the left, narrowly missing the shell. "Captain," Amadi shouted. "What the blazes are you doing?" Sean cried. Others joined Amadi and Sean into yelling at him to return to the Soaring Phoenix. Palmer glided towards the Fiery Damsel. Blood dripped onto the ocean. Damn! If Kane chased him onto his ship, Palmer's men would not hesitate to sever his head and he'd join the floating corpses. A movement in the water caught his eyes. Damn sharks. The pain throbbed in his wing. He turned around and headed back to the Soaring Phoenix. Kane spread his wings wide, landed on the deck, and transformed back into a man. He half smiled at the holes marring the hull of the Fiery Damsel as she turned and headed back out to sea. Sean stood there with his arms crossed over his chest. "Capt'n, what the devil were you thinking?" Kane rubbed his throbbing shoulder. "Denying Palmer his pleasure." "Orders Capt'n," Sean cocked his eyebrow. "Lower the longboat," he ordered. "Have Doc go. One of the survivors appears to be injured." "Aye, aye, Capt'n," Sean nodded. The Fiery Damsel steered away, leaving a bloody mess. Kane narrowed his eyes. One day, he'd have his revenge. Revenge would be to force Palmer to fight like a man, sever his head, and tear out his black heart. Amadi, and Doc, their ship's surgeon, rowed towards the lad and man. A gray fin glided through the water. The lad's eyes grew huge as the shark came, closer and closer and closer. The shark bit into a corpse, severing an arm. The black ocean turned red. Doc grabbed the lad and jerked him into the boat. Another predator skimmed the side, and the boat rocked. "Bloody hell," Kane spat. "Help him." The lad pointed at the man still clinging to a piece of the broken mast. "Please help my father." The flute ship cracked and groaned as the bow broke off and sank into the ocean. Fiery sails and pieces of the ship fell into the sea. A wave rolled up, the man slammed into the longboat, hitting his head on the starboard side with a solid bang. His eyes fell closed, and he released the driftwood. Kane grimaced. With his huge plump lifeless body, the man outweighed his men by a hundred pounds. Doc seized the man's coat and yanked. "Help me, Amadi." Amadi grabbed underneath the man's right arm and pulled while Doc clutched his other arm. Another shark had joined the first and with each pass, they inched closer to the lad's father. The man slipped out of Amadi's hand and splashed into to the ocean. Kane sucked in his breath. "No!" the lad screamed. "Amadi, Doc, look out!" Kane cried out. A fin headed straight for the half submerged fat man. Kane yanked out his pistol, fired and hit the fin. Blood seeped down the fin and the fin disappeared into the water. Amadi gripped the man's shoulder and Doc seized the man's thigh as the men stood and heaved the man onto the rocking boat. "Get out of there," Kane waved his arm. Amadi and Doc rowed the boat back to the Soaring Phoenix. Doc seized the lad and pushed him at the ladder. 

The pain throbbed in his wing. He turned around and headed back to the Soaring Phoenix. Kane spread his wings wide, landed on the deck, and transformed back into a man. He half smiled at the holes marring the hull of the Fiery Damsel as she turned and headed back out to sea. Sean stood there with his arms crossed over his chest. "Capt'n, what the devil were you thinking?" Kane rubbed his throbbing shoulder. "Denying Palmer his pleasure." "Orders Capt'n," Sean cocked his eyebrow. "Lower the longboat," he ordered. "Have Doc go. One of the survivors appears to be injured." "Aye, aye, Capt'n," Sean nodded. The Fiery Damsel steered away, leaving a bloody mess. Kane narrowed his eyes. One day, he'd have his revenge. Revenge would be to force Palmer to fight like a man, sever his head, and tear out his black heart. Amadi, and Doc, their ship's surgeon, rowed towards the lad and man. A gray fin glided through the water. The lad's eyes grew huge as the shark came, closer and closer and closer. The shark bit into a corpse, severing an arm. The black ocean turned red. Doc grabbed the lad and jerked him into the boat. Another predator skimmed the side, and the boat rocked. "Bloody hell," Kane spat. "Help him." The lad pointed at the man still clinging to a piece of the broken mast. "Please help my father." The flute ship cracked and groaned as the bow broke off and sank into the ocean. Fiery sails and pieces of the ship fell into the sea. A wave rolled up, the man slammed into the longboat, hitting his head on the starboard side with a solid bang. His eyes fell closed, and he released the driftwood. Kane grimaced. With his huge plump lifeless body, the man outweighed his men by a hundred pounds. Doc seized the man's coat and yanked. "Help me, Amadi." Amadi grabbed underneath the man's right arm and pulled while Doc clutched his other arm. Another shark had joined the first and with each pass, they inched closer to the lad's father. The man slipped out of Amadi's hand and splashed into to the ocean. Kane sucked in his breath. "No!" the lad screamed. "Amadi, Doc, look out!" Kane cried out. A fin headed straight for the half submerged fat man. Kane yanked out his pistol, fired and hit the fin. Blood seeped down the fin and the fin disappeared into the water. Amadi gripped the man's shoulder and Doc seized the man's thigh as the men stood and heaved the man onto the rocking boat. "Get out of there," Kane waved his arm. Amadi and Doc rowed the boat back to the Soaring Phoenix. Doc seized the lad and pushed him at the ladder. The lad hesitated and glanced at his father. "Move," Doc said. He pulled out his pistol and pointed. The lad's eyes widened. He grabbed the rope ladder and climbed. Terror reflected in that cherub face. The lad's shirt swallowed his slender frame and a rope, wrapped around his waist twice, held his two sizes too big breeches. He folded his arms across his chest and stared at the railing. He stood on his tip toes, no doubt waiting eagerly for his father. Kane gazed at the lad. Something wasn't right. He just couldn't put a finger on it. Amadi appeared over the railing and glared at Doc. "Help me fool. He weighs more than a bloated whale." Doc grabbed one of the man's arms as Amadi, pale and sweat pouring down his temples, grunted and pushed the fat unconscious man onto the ship. "'Twas a heavy one, Capt'n." He tossed the man onto the deck, bent over and put his hands on his knees. The man's knee length blue woolen coat and dark breeches stuck to his stout body. Thick salt and pepper black hair clung to his head like an octopus perching on top of a white clam. A gold chain with a ruby pendent hung around his double chin. Kane rubbed his chin. The Captain? Or some wealthy merchant? Amadi exhaled and stood. He rubbed the back of his neck. "Twas a grand job, Amadi." Kane half smiled. Amadi was the strongest man aboard the ship and could lift three or four barrels full of rum over his head without breaking a sweat. The rich Sassenach was lucky. Amadi carried him, or he'd be a feast for the hungry beasts. "Did you see any other survivors, Doc?" Kane asked. "No, Cap'n," Doc shook his head, his face grim. "All dead." Hannah winced at those words and released a half sob. Her fault. Her powers failed her. She should have stopped the mast from crashing into the ocean or shielded the ship from the ramming cannonballs or increased the ship's speed. Her grandmother would have, but she wasn't Grandmother. The Captain called his attention to a blond man. The wind blew his thick sun streaked hair curling around his massive shoulders and opened his shirt, revealing a chiseled chest covered with curly golden hair. His trousers outlined his firm buttocks and sold thighs. He was too pretty, like an archangel. "Mallory, how long until we reach Tortuga?" Tortuga? A pirate's heaven. They'd be sold into slavery or worse. "Don't worry Capt'n." The suave man smiled as he slapped his thigh with his left hand. "Blimey, may I sink and perish in blood if I canna get us in a fortnight." From where he laid sprawled out on the deck, her father groaned. Hannah rushed over, sank down beside him and with a trembling hand, she patted his face. "Wake up, father." His pale skin and white lips terrified her. Breathe. She put her hand on his chest and his chest rose up and down. She sighed with relief. Good, he was alive. Her hair fell across her face. She straightened, shoved the strands from her face, and leaned over again. But the unruly hair slapped right back down over her cheeks. Curious male faces stared at her. Pirates. Her freezing fingers gripped her father's shirt and she shook him. Wake up. Footsteps echoed behind her. She froze. She glanced over her shoulder. Her gaze travelled up muscular legs, narrow hips, and broad shoulders. She had to tilt her head to see into his face. Her heart silenced. Dark green eyes held her gaze. The man's long black hair hung past his broad shoulders. His white shirt opened to the navel and his black breeches clung to his muscular legs. He had a pistol stuck into his belt on one hip and a sword in his sheath on the other. 'twas Lucifer himself. A breeze rushed over her and her damp clothes clung to her wet skin. Her teeth chattered, and her skin chilled. "Welcome aboard the Soaring Phoenix, lad." The captain grinned, revealing a single dimple on his left cheek. She exhaled and lowered her shaking hand. Her disguise worked. For once in her life, she listened to her father, and he had been right. "Take the lad and this man below. Give 'em some dry clothes. Bring 'em back up here. I want a word with 'em," the captain said. The melodic Irish timbre rolled off the devil's lips. No menace echoed in his voice, but then, he didn't know she played a trick on him either. Wait, what did he want to talk to her about? Maybe he did suspect the truth? "Aye, Aye, Capt'n," a clean-shaven pirate near her answered. Shirtless, he was bald and wore a black eye patch over his left eye. He was a little smaller than the Captain, but his sculpted muscles rivaled that of his captain. He had on red breeches, his sword and pistol hung off his black belt. Hannah jumped at a pirate's loud voice. Before she knew what was happening, the same man grabbed her with ironclad hands, lifted her off the deck, wrapped his arm around her waist and held her snug next to his muscular body. She broke out in a cold sweat and her heart thumped harder. Her fingertips turned numb. She kicked her feet and pounded her fists on his hard thighs and abdomen, but he captured one wrist, his hand a steal manacle. She winced. "The devil with you boy, don't make me lose my temper," he said. "I'm not gonna hurt ya." Clenching her fists, she glared up at him. She gritted her teeth. Why did her wrist throb then? In front of her, the same two men, Doc, wearing a red bandana over his dark black hair and Amadi, the tallest black man she had ever seen, who rescued them earlier, lifted her father. "Damn," Doc said, "he's breaking my arms." Amadi with his long dark multiple braids woven with gold beads, grasped father's ankles and grunted. "Quit your bellyaching Doc. You didn't have to carry the bastard up a rope ladder." The deeper they went into the ship's dim interior, the air changed from clean and fresh to stale and musty. The men grunted and groaned carrying her father. With their tormented and sweating faces and strained muscles, they managed not to drop him. At the bottom of the stairs, her captor set her on her feet. Rows of hammocks swung between beams from one side of the room to the other. She rubbed her cold arms and took a step away from him. Now what? He studied her. "Cook will bring you some dry clothes." She folded her arms across her chest. Doc and Amadi hoisted her father into a swinging hammock. Her father sighed as if he was in a restful sleep. How could he sleep though this? Was he faking? "Thanks, Michael," Amadi said. "You must be getting soft in your old age, Amadi." Michael slapped him on the shoulder and grinned. Amadi put his large hands on his wide hips and braced his shoulders. His green vest revealed a chiseled chest and a flat stomach. Black breeches fitted his long, muscular legs. His head brushed the top of the ceiling. She swallowed hard. She had never seen such a tall black man. He looked like he could break her in two with one hand. "Don't push your luck, boy," Amadi glowered at Michael. "You didn't have to carry dis gent up a rope ladder." "D'ye now?" Michael shrugged his shoulders. "True enough, I take your point." Glancing over at Doc, he motioned. "Come on." He nodded. "Topside." A gruff, wizened man with a white beard and shoulder length gray hair leaned against the door. "You lads are as weak as a new babe if you can't lift such a wee man." Amadi sauntered over. "Don't make me mad, Cook." The old man gave him a lopsided grin. "Get
 out of here ye wee lass." Amadi stormed out of the room. His angry footsteps pounded on the stairs. Michael pushed past Cook while Doc bumped his shoulder, but Cook only cackled. Hannah would have wet her breeches if those pirates slammed into her shoulder. Cook flashed his gaze over her. Chuckling, he strolled to a large trunk against a wall and opened it. After searching through it, he grabbed a white shirt and pair of black breeches and put them on the nearest hammock. "These are too big for ye lad, but they're dry. I'll be back to take you to the Capt'n." Hannah waited until she could no longer hear Cook's footsteps before she tore off her shirt and breeches. The faint glow of the lantern revealed the top of her mounds peering over the wooly bandage. She tried shoving the mounds back down, but the bandage had shrunk. Her cheeks burned. She was a stone's throw from being a pirate's concubine. Her hand clenched the flimsy wet material. She wanted to rip it off, but what if the Captain ordered her to take the shirt off? She'd have nothing underneath. Her hands dropped to her side. Trapped in a shark-infested cove. She snatched the shirt and slipped her hand through one sleeve. Silk and warmth caressed her clammy skin, chasing away the cold. Her shaking hands retied her soaking hair, and she glanced down. Could she pass for a cabin boy? She put on her best scowl and clenched her fists. Hannah blinked back tears. If only, she had a better handle on her powers, she might be able to get her and her father out of this mess, but she had failed last night to save her crew. 'Twas her fault everybody died. Why would today be any different? She slumped onto the hard oak floor. The sole lantern in the room dimly lit the corridor and black shadows flickered on the wall like bats. Looming, twirling, menacing. She frowned and huddled her knees against her chest. She leaned her head back against the wall. Not real. Not real. Not real. Footsteps shuffled down the hallway. A large billowy shadow drifted along the wall. Fear shot through her and pooled at the bottom of her toes. She jumped to her feet, rushed to her father and dug her fingers into his shoulders. She shook him. Not doing this alone. Her father snorted and spit flew into her mouth. She gagged and slapped him across the face.
  
  When you open your eyes, you're somewhat surprised you still have them. You were fairly certain you were dead.
  
  Then you see the figure looming above you and dread smacks straight into your no-longer-beating heart. Oh, he looks unassuming enough: weatherbeaten face, nut brown skin, and—flat on your back though you are—you can see that his jacket and waistcoat are fashionable. It's the eyes, though, that give him away. Gray and deep, they swirl like storm clouds.
  
  You say it anyway: "Who are you?"
  
  The man—though you don't think he's truly human—laughs and offers you a hand. "I have gone by many names," he says, pulling you to your feet. You're surprised to see that you're on flagship, and that she's seen very little damage. "Some say I work for the storm goddess Guabancex. Others that I am the guide to Maketaori Guayaba's deathly realm. Some curse me for a devil, others laud me as the son of an old sea god. I am a serpent or a storm or a swift blow to a sailor's heart." His grin flashes like lightning. "You may call me Jones if you like."
  
  And there it is. You're definitely dead. You take long enough to respond to Jones's pronouncement that he clears his throat. "Usually I get a better response than that."
  
  "Should I bow?" you ask, and your voice comes out curiously flat.
  
  He decides to take it as a joke. "Not necessary. I've come to offer you a second chance at being a legend," he says. "I find that the Lucayan is short one ghost ship lately, and I'm in the market for another. Serve me seven years, and your name will live on long after your final rest."
  
     "I'm already a legend."

        Jones laughs, a rumble of thunder and a crash of waves together. "So you are. But you could be a bigger one."
      
        "Are you now?" Jones asks, and his eyes are as piercing as a whaler's harpoon. "I think you'll find that whatever notoriety you've gained in life will fade quickly enough. But in my service, well…" He spreads his arm in a gesture of calm waters and deserted beaches and possibility. "You should consider my offer."
     "What service do you require?"
      "You'd be free of curses, and know your own mind," he promises. "And as such, it's largely your own decision. You'd pick up the lost souls from the sea, become their captain. You could strike fear or mercy into the hearts of pirates and sailors as you choose. You could be a rescuer or a villain, luring Crown ships or pirates to their deaths in strange waters or steering them clear of obstacles." He shrugs. "It's all the same to me, so long as there are souls to be collected and guided. I've been told I'm fickle.”
    "Very well. Seven years of service.”
      A contract appears before you, much like the very first contract you signed as a lowly sailor. The terms are loose: seven years of service, but that service is undefined. There is no discussion of payment.
						
      A quill appears next to the contract, and you sign, ink the color of blood pressing from the quill into the scroll. The scroll snaps back into a roll as you finalize your mark, and the quill, contract, and storm all disappear in a moment. You have the sense that time has passed; certainly, your crew are no longer in their lifeboats around the ship.
						
      Jones taps the rolled-up contract against his palm. "I'll be seeing you," he promises.
						
				
      And then, darkness swallows you again. It feels rather more final this time.
						

  

BENEATH Gibraltar’s towering and craggy protection, the mixed collection of anchored ship tugged at their cables and waited for the sudden squall to abate. Despite streaks of pale blue which showed themselves occasionally between the brisk clouds, the air was cold, with a bite in it more common in the Bay of Biscay than the Mediterranean. Considering its strategic importance, Gibraltar’s anchorage was unusually deserted. A few storeships, some brigs and schooners finding shelter or awaiting orders made up the bulk of vessels there, and of major men-of-war there were but three. Anchored well apart from the other hotch-potch of local craft were three ships of the line, seventy-fours, which in this month of January 1798 were still the most popular, and the most adaptable, vessels in any plan of battle. The one anchored nearest to the land bore the name Lysander across her broad counter, a name to match the figurehead which stared angrily from beneath her bowsprit. It was a fine figurehead, with the black-bearded Spartan general adorned in crested helmet and breastplate, originally carved by Henry Callaway of Deptford. Like the rest of the big two-decker, it was well painted, with a look of newness which belied the ship’s eleven long years in the King’s service. Back and forth, up and down her wide quarterdeck her captain, Thomas Herrick, walked with barely a pause to peer towards the shore. If he considered his ship’s appearance and condition, it was more from anxiety than pride. The months of work in England to get Lysander ready for sea, the whole wearing business of re-commissioning and gathering what amounted to practically a raw company had gone on without a pause. Stores and powder, water and provisions, weapons and the men to handle them. Herrick had more than once questioned the fates which had given him his new command. And yet, despite the delays and infuriating slackness amongst dockyard men and chandlers, he had seen his ship grow from a disorganised chaos to a living, vital creature. Frightened men brought aboard by the unrelenting press-gangs, and others gathered by motives as varied as patriotism or merely fleeing into the Navy to avoid a hangman’s halter, had been slowly and painstakingly moulded into something which, if still far from perfect, could offer hope for the future. The first squall in the Bay as Lysander had crawled south towards Portugal had brought some weakness to light. Too many seasoned hands in one watch, too many landsmen in another. But under Herrick’s careful watch, and the efforts of Lysander’s remaining backbone of professional warrant officers, they had at least come to terms with the awesome maze of rigging, the rebellious and treacherous folds of canvas which made up their daily lives at sea. Once at anchor below the Rock, Herrick had waited with growing apprehension for this particular day. More ships had arrived and anchored nearby. The other two seventy-fours, Osiris and Nicator, the frigate Buzzard and the little sloop of war Harebell were no longer separate entities but part of a whole. By order of the Admiralty in London they had become one. The squadron, in which Herrick’s ship would hoist the broad pendant of commodore, and over which and through all imaginable circumstances Richard Bolitho would at any moment now be exercising his right of command. It was strange when Herrick hesitated to consider the matter. It was only four months since he and Bolitho had returned to England from this same sea. After a bloody battle in which Herrick’s own ship had been destroyed and a complete French squadron routed or taken, they had gone to the Admiralty together. It still seemed like a dream, a memory of long past. The result of that visit had been far-reaching. For Richard Bolitho an immediate promotion to commodore, and for Herrick the post of flag captain. Their admiral had been less fortunate. Packed off to govern a penal colony in New South Wales, the very swiftness of his fall from grace had somehow measured the step between authority and oblivion. Herrick’s first overwhelming pleasure of being appointed flag captain to Bolitho had been slightly marred by another of the Admiralty’s changes of heart. Instead of Bolitho’s own ship, Euryalus, the great one hundred gun three-decker which he had originally seized as a prize from the French, they had been given the Lysander. Easier to handle than a great first-rate, possibly, but Herrick suspected that another officer more senior than Bolitho had claimed the ex-Frenchman for himself. He paused in his pacing and ran his eyes along the busy decks. Seamen were working on the gangways and boat tier. Others swayed high overhead amongst the black criss-cross of shrouds and stays, halliards and braces, making sure that no frayed lines, no broken wisps of hemp would greet the new commodore as he stepped through the entry port. The marines were already in position. No need to worry about their Major Leroux. He was speaking with his lieutenant, a rather vacant young man called Nepean, while a sergeant checked each marine’s musket and appearance. The midshipman of the watch must have an aching arm, Herrick thought. He was very conscious of his captain’s presence, and was holding a heavy telescope to his eye, obeying the last order, to report immediately when the commodore’s boat shoved off from the jetty. Herrick shifted his gaze outboard towards the other vessels of the small squadron. He had had little to do with them so far, but already knew quite a lot about their various captains. From the little sloop which regularly bared her copper as she rolled uncomfortably in the squall to the nearest two-decker, Osiris, they all seemed to have some sort of link. Nicator’s captain, for instance. Herrick had discovered that he had served with Bolitho during the American Revolution when they had both been lieutenants. Their reunion might present pleasure or otherwise, he thought. Commander Inch of the dizzily swaying Harebell had commanded a bomb vessel with the old squadron, here in the Mediterranean. Of Buzzard’s captain, Raymond Javal, he had learned little but gossip. Hasty temper. Hungry for prize money. He had all the makings of a typical if awkward frigate captain. He let his gaze rest on the Osiris once again and tried to conceal his irritation. She was almost a twin to the Lysander and her destiny was firmly in the hands of Captain Charles Farquhar. All those years ago. It was like another fate which had somehow drawn them together once more, to serve under the same Richard Bolitho. Then it had been in the frigate Phalarope in the West Indies during the Americans’ fight for independence. Bolitho had been her captain, Herrick his first lieutenant and Farquhar one of the midshipmen. Arrogant, high-born, Farquhar never failed to prick Herrick’s resentment. Even looking at his Osiris did nothing to help. Her ornate gingerbread and other carving at poop and beakhead displayed a lavish use of real gilt paint as an outward sign of her captain’s status and prosperity. So far they had avoided meeting each other, except when Farquhar had reported his arrival at Gibraltar. Any sort of fresh beginning had faded as Farquhar had drawled, “I say, you don’t seem to have spent much on the old ship, eh?” That same maddening smile. “Our new lord and master won’t like that, y’know!” Suddenly, the lower line of black gunports opened along Osiris’s sloping side, and with perfect precision the whole battery of thirty-two-pounders trundled into the weak sunlight. As one. Something like panic ran through Herrick’s mind. Farquhar would never allow his ambitious brain to be fogged by some stupid memory or dislike. He had kept his eye on what mattered most to him. Which at this particular minute was to impress the commodore. It happened to be Richard Bolitho, a man more dear to Herrick than any other living being. But if it had been Satan himself Farquhar would have been ready. As if to make the final stab the midshipman of the watch shouted excitedly, “Barge shoving off from the jetty, sir!” Herrick licked his lips. They felt like dry ashes. “Very well, Mr. Saxby. My compliments to the first lieutenant. He may muster the hands now.” Richard Bolitho walked to the quarter windows of the broad cabin and looked towards the other ships. Despite the importance of the moment, the solemnity of being received aboard his own flagship for the first time in his life, he could not contain his excitement. It was like wine and laughter all bubbling up inside him, held in check by some last reserve. He turned and saw Herrick watching him from beside the screen door. Some seamen were carefully arranging chests and boxes which had been swayed up from the barge, and he could hear his coxswain, Allday, bawling angrily at someone to take care. “Well, Thomas, that was a fine welcome.” He strode across the deck with its neat covering of black and white chequered canvas and took Herrick’s hand. Overhead he could hear the thump of boots as the marine guard departed, the returning familiar sounds of normal routine. Herrick smiled awkwardly. “Thank you, sir.” He gestured at the baggage. “I hope you’ve brought all you need. It seems we may be a while from home.” Bolitho studied him gravely. Herrick’s stocky figure, his round, homely face and those bright blue eyes were almost as familiar as Allday’s. But he seemed different somehow. It was only four months, and yet . . . He thought of all that had happened since that visit to the Admiralty. The discussions with men so senior and powerful that he still could not grasp that promotion could mean so much. Whenever he had mentioned his anxiety over the progress being made with his new flagship he had seen that amused look in their eyes. The admiral who had given him his appointment, Sir George Beauchamp, had put it into words. “You’ll have to
 forget that sort of thing now, Bolitho. The captain must deal with the running of a ship. Yours is a more exacting task.” Eventually he had taken passage to Gibraltar in a fast frigate, pausing in the Tagus with despatches for the flagship of the fleet employed on blockade duty. There he had been given an audience with the admiral, the Earl of St. Vincent, so titled because of his great victory eleven months back. The admiral, still affectionately known as “Old Jarvy” by many of his subordinates, but only when he was well out of earshot, had greeted him briskly. “You’ve got your orders. See you carry ’em out. It’s been months since we knew what the French were up to. Our spies in the channel ports reported that Bonaparte visited the coast many times to lay plans for invading England.” He had given his dry chuckle. “I think my medicine off Cape St. Vincent taught ’em to tread warily where the sea is concerned. Bonaparte is a land animal. A planner. Unfortunately, we have nobody to match him yet. Not on land, that is.” Looking back it was hard to measure how much the admiral had managed to explain and describe in that brief interview. He had been on active duty with hardly a break, and yet he had been able to sum up the situation in home waters and the Mediterranean better than any Admiralty official. The admiral had walked with him to his quarterdeck and had said quietly, “Beauchamp is the man to plan this sort of mission. But it needs seagoing officers to push those ideas to reality. Your squadron’s efforts last year in the Mediterranean told us a great deal about French intentions. Your admiral, Broughton, did not perhaps understand their true significance until it was all too late. For him, that is.” He had given Bolitho a grim stare. “We must know the worth of putting a fleet into these waters again. If we divide our squadrons for a bad purpose, the French will soon explore our weakness. But your orders will tell you what you must do. Only you can decide how you are going to do it.” Again that dry chuckle. “I wanted Nelson for the task, but he is still sorely weakened by the loss of his arm. Beauchamp chose you for this tickle at Bonaparte’s underbelly. I hope for all our sakes it was a wise choice.” And now, after all the discussions, the searching through reports to discover the value of countless ideas of the enemy’s motives and objectives, he was here in his own flagship. Beyond the thick glass windows were other ships, all linked by the dovetailed broad pendant which had broken at the masthead as he had climbed aboard to the slap of muskets and the din of fifes and drums. And he still could not believe it. He felt the same as before. As eager to get to sea as he had been in the past whenever he had joined a new ship. But the difference would soon display itself in all manner of ways. When Herrick had been his first lieutenant he had stood between his captain and company. The link and the barrier. Now Herrick, as flag captain, would stand between him and his other officers, his little squadron and every man-jack aboard each individual ship. Five vessels in all, way over two thousand souls divided amongst them. It was that kind of assessment which brought home the reality of his command. He asked, “How is young Adam? I did not see him when I came aboard.” As he said it he saw the stiffness come to Herrick’s face. “I was about to tell you, sir. He is with the surgeon.” He looked at the deck. “A slight accident, but, thank God, no real harm done.” Bolitho replied, “The truth, Thomas. Is my nephew ill?” Herrick looked up, his blue eyes suddenly angry. “A stupid argument with his opposite number in the Osiris, sir. Her sixth lieutenant gave some sort of insult. They went ashore on their separate duties but arranged to meet and settle the matter.” Bolitho made himself walk slowly to the stern windows and stare down at the swirling water around the rudder. “A duel?” Just the sound of the word made him feel sick. Despairing. Like father like son? It was not possible. “High spirits more like.” Herrick sounded unconvinced. “Neither was badly hurt, though I gather Adam nicked the other fellow the worse.” Bolitho turned and regarded him calmly. “I will see him directly.” Herrick swallowed. “With your permission, sir, I should like to deal with the matter myself.” Bolitho nodded slowly, feeling a great gap yawning between him and his friend. He said quietly, “Of course, Thomas. Adam Pascoe is my nephew. But he is one of your officers now.” Herrick tried to relax. “I am deeply sorry to trouble you in your first hour, sir. Not for the whole world would I wish that.” “I know.” He smiled gravely. “It was foolish of me to interfere. I was a flag captain and often resented my superior’s hand in my own affairs.” Herrick looked around the big cabin, eager to change the subject. “I hope everything is to your liking, sir. Your servant is preparing a meal, and I have had some hands detailed to stow your chests for you.” “Thank you. It seems most satisfactory.” He stopped. It was happening again. The formal tones. The offering and an acceptance. When they had always been used to sharing. Understanding. Herrick asked suddenly, “Will we be putting to sea soon, sir?” “Aye, Thomas. Tomorrow forenoon if the wind stays favourable.” He pulled the watch from his pocket and snapped open the guard. “I would wish to see my officers—” He faltered. Even that was changed. He added, “To see the other captains as soon as is convenient. I received some more despatches from the governor here, but after I have read them I should like to tell the squadron what we are about.” He smiled. “Don’t look so troubled, Thomas. It is as hard for me as for you.” For a brief moment Bolitho saw the old light in Herrick’s eyes. The warmth and trust which could so easily turn to hurt. Herrick replied, “I feel like an old foot in a new shoe.” He smiled, too. “I’ll not let you down.” He turned and left the cabin, and after a discreet pause Allday and two seamen carrying a large case strode through the door. Allday glanced swiftly round the cabin and seemed to approve. Bolitho relaxed very slowly. Allday was always the same, and for that he was suddenly grateful. Even his new blue jacket with the large gilt buttons, the nankeen trousers and buckled shoes which Bolitho had purchased for him to reveal his new status as a commodore’s own coxswain did little to hide his thickset, rugged individuality. Bolitho unfastened his sword and gave it to him. “Well, Allday, what do you make of her, eh?” The man eyed him calmly. “A well-found ship,” he hesitated over the word, “sir”. Even Allday had been made to alter his ways. Never in the past had he called him anything but “Captain.” It was their own unrehearsed arrangement. The new rank had changed that, too. Allday read his thoughts and grinned ruefully. “Sorry about that, sir.” He glared at the two seamen who were watching them curiously, the case balanced between them. “But I can wait. It’ll be Sir Richard afore long, and that’s no error!” Allday waited until the seamen had gone and said quietly, “I reckon you’d like to be left alone now, sir. I’ll see that your servant is warned about your customs.” Bolitho nodded. “You know me too well.” Allday closed the door behind him and glanced coldly at the ramrod-stiff marine sentry outside the cabin. To himself he murmured, “Better’n you’ll ever know.” On the quarterdeck once more, Herrick walked slowly to the nettings and stared at the other ships. It had been a bad beginning. For both of them. Perhaps it was all in his own mind, like his dislike for Farquhar. The latter obviously did not give a damn for him, so why should he get so easily ruffled? Bolitho had looked exactly as he had known he would. The same gravity which could alter in an instant to a youthful exuberance. His hair as black as ever, his slim figure no different, apart from the obvious stiffness in his right shoulder. He counted the months, nearly seven now, since Bolitho had been marked down by a musket ball. The lines at the corners of his mouth were a little deeper. Pain, responsibility? Parts of each, he decided. He saw the officer of the watch eyeing him cautiously and called, “We will signal the squadron, Mr Kipling. All captains repair on board when I so order.” He pictured them putting on their best uniforms. Inch in his tiny cabin, Farquhar in his lavish quarters. But each and all would be wondering, as he was. Where bound? What to expect? The price for both. Alone in his cabin Bolitho heard feet thudding along the deck overhead, and after a momentary hesitation threw off his dress coat with its solitary gold stripe and seated himself at his desk. He slit open the large envelope but still hesitated over reading the neatly written despatches. He kept seeing Herrick’s anxious face. They were almost the same age, and yet Herrick seemed to have grown much older, his brown hair marked here and there like hoar frost. It was hard not to see him as his best friend. He had to think of him as a strength, the flag captain of a squadron which had never acted as a single unit before. A rough task for any man and for Thomas Herrick he tried to hold back the sudden doubts. Herrick’s poor beginnings, the son of a clerk, his very honesty which had marked him as a man who could be trusted under any known circumstances, could hinder his overall judgement. Herrick was a man who would obey any lawful order without question, with no consideration for his own life or ruin. But to assume control of the squadron if its commodore should die in battle? It was strange to realise that Lysander’s original master had fallen at St. Vincent. Her commodore, George Twyford, had been killed in the first broadsides, and her captain, John Dyke, was even now enduring a living hell in the naval hospital at Haslar, too cruelly maimed even
 to feed himself. The same ship had survived them and many more. He looked around the neat cabin with its well-carved chairs and dark mahogany table. He could almost feel them watching him. He sighed and began to read the dispatches. Bolitho nodded to the five officers who stood around the cabin table and said, “Please be seated, gentlemen.” He watched them as they eased their chairs towards him, their mixed expressions of pleasure, excitement and curiosity. It was a very special moment, and he guessed they were all sharing it with him, if for varied reasons. Farquhar had not changed. Slim and elegant, with the self-assurance he had carried even as a midshipman. Now a post-captain of thirty-two, his ambition shone in his eyes to match his gleaming epaulettes. Francis Inch, bobbing and horse-faced, could barely restrain his beam of welcome. As commander of the sloop he would be vital for inshore work and sweeping ahead of the squadron. Raymond Javal, the frigate’s captain, looked more like a Frenchman than an English sea officer. Very dark and swarthy, with thick greasy hair, he had features so narrow that his deepset eyes seemed to dominate his whole appearance. He looked at captain George Probyn of the Nicator and gave a brief smile. They had served together in the old Trojan when the American Revolution had erupted to change the face of the world. Yet it was almost impossible to see him in those times. He sat hunched against the table like a large, shabby innkeeper. A year or so older than Bolitho, he had left the Trojan in much the same manner as himself. To take command of a captured blockade runner and sail her to the nearest friendly port. Unlike Bolitho, however, whose chance had led directly to his first command, Probyn had been captured by an American privateer and had fretted out most of the war as a prisoner until an exchange had been made with a French officer. Those vital years in his early service had obviously cost him dearly. He looked uneasy, with a sly, darting way of examining his fellow captains and then looking down into his clasped hands. Herrick said formally, “All present, sir.” Bolitho looked at the table. In his mind’s eye he was seeing his written orders. You are herby authorised and directed to proceed with your squadron to ascertain by every means in your power the presence and destination of considerable armaments, He began quietly, “As you will know, the enemy has spent much time in seeking out some flaw in our defences. Apart from our successes at sea, we have been able to do little to stop the spread of French progress and influence. In my view, Bonaparte has never changed from his original tack, which was and still must be to reach India and seize our trade routes. The French admiral, Suffren, almost succeeded during the last war.” He saw Herrick’s eyes flicker towards him, no doubt remembering when they had sailed together in the East Indies, seeing for themselves the determination of their old enemy to regain ground lost in that uneasy peace. “Today Bonaparte must know that any delay in his preparations can only give us time to gain strength.” They all looked round as Inch exclaimed cheerfully. “We’ll show them, sir!” He grinned at the others. “Like we did before!” Bolitho smiled. Glad that Inch, if ignorant of the facts, had not changed. Thankful that his excited comment had broken some of the distance between himself and the others. “Thank you, Commander Inch. Your optimism does you credit.” Inch bobbed and flushed with pleasure. “However, we have no real intelligence of which way the French will move first. The bulk of our fleet is operating from the Tagus, to keep a wedge between the French and their Spanish allies. But the enemy may attack Portugal because of our presence there, or indeed he may attempt to invade Ireland again.” He could not conceal his bitterness. “As they intended when our own Navy was beset with misfortune which broke last year in the great mutinies at the Nore and Spithead.” Farquhar looked at his cuff. “Should have hanged a thousand of the devils, not a mere handful!” Bolitho eyed him coldly. “Perhaps if a little more thought had been given to our sailors’ wants in the first place, no punishment would have been needed at all!” Farquhar smiled up at him. “I take the point, sir.” Bolitho looked at his scattered papers, giving himself time. He had risen too easily to Farquhar’s intolerance. He continued, “Our duty will be first to examine the progress of French preparations in the Gulf of Lions. At Toulon, Marseilles and any other port about which we can discover enemy activity.” He looked at each of them gravely. “Our fleet is stretched to the limit. We cannot afford to allow the enemy to scatter it to the extent it can be devoured piece by piece. Likewise, we must not have a large fleet at one end of the ocean while the enemy is at the other. Seek, find and bring ’em to battle, it is the only way!” Javal said harshly, “And mine is the only frigate, sir.” “Is that an observation or a complaint?” Javal shrugged. “A malady, sir.” Probyn darted him a quick glance. “It is a vast responsibility.” He looked at Farquhar. “If we meet with superior forces we will be without support.” Farquhar eyed him coolly. “But at least we will know they are nearby, my dear George!” Herrick said, “It is a serious matter!” “Apparently.” Farquhar’s eyes flashed. “So let us tackle it seriously.” Bolitho made them all turn towards him. “One thing is certain. We must work together. I do not care what you may think of the value of these orders. We must interpret them into deeds. Drive them to a rightful and profitable end.” Farquhar nodded. “I agree, sir.” The others remained silent. “Now, if you will return to your commands and relay my wishes to your people, I will be pleased to have you aboard to dine with me tonight.” They all stood up, already planning how they would rephrase his words to their own subordinates. Like Bolitho, each one of them, except Inch, would probably wish to be alone in his own ship to prepare himself and his ideas for whatever lay ahead. But they would have little enough time together, Bolitho thought. He needed to know each of them better, just as when a signal broke from Lysander’s yards his captains would read the mind of the man who made it. One by one they made their farewells. Probyn was the last to leave, as Bolitho knew he would. He said awkwardly, “Good to see you again, sir. They were great times we once shared. I always knew you would be successful, famous even.” His eyes moved hurriedly round the cabin. “I have been less fortunate. Through no fault of mine. But without influence . . .” He did not finish it. Bolitho smiled. “It makes my appointment all the easier to have old friends in company.” The door closed and he walked slowly to the heavy mahogany wine cabinet which he had brought from London. It was beautifully worked, every join and surface the mark of a craftsman. He was still looking at it when Herrick returned from seeing the other captains over the side into their various boats. He sighed. “Went well, I thought, sir.” He saw the cabinet and gave a low whistle. “Now there is a thing of beauty!” Bolitho smiled. “It was a gift. More useful than some, I’d say, Thomas.” Herrick was examining it carefully and said, “I have your nephew outside, sir. I have dealt with his foolishness. Some extra duties to entertain his busy mind. I thought you’d like to see him.” He touched the cabinet, adding, “May I enquire who gave you this fine piece, sir?” Bolitho replied, “Mrs. Pareja. You will recall her, of course.” He checked himself as something like a shutter dropped behind Herrick’s eyes. Herrick said flatly, “Yes, sir. I remember her well.” “What is it, man?” Herrick faced him. “With ships coming fresh from England, sir, there is always rumour, scandal if you like. There was some talk about your meeting with the lady in London.” Bolitho stared at him. “In God’s name, Thomas, this doesn’t sound like you.” Herrick persisted, “Because of it, your nephew crossed swords with another lieutenant.” He added stubbornly, “A matter of honour they call it.” Bolitho looked away. And he had been imagining it was because of Pascoe’s background, his dead father. Traitor and renegade. He said, “Thank you for telling me.” “Somebody had to, sir.” The blue eyes were pleading. “You’ve done so much, for all of us, I’d not wish to see it thrown away because of a—” “I thanked you for telling me, Thomas. Not for your opinion of the lady.” Herrick opened the door. “I will call him in, sir.” He did not look back. Bolitho sat down on the bench seat below the stern windows and watched a fishing boat sculling below the two-decker’s counter. The fisherman glanced up at him without expression. Probably in the pay of the Spanish commandant across the water in Algeciras, he thought. Taking the names of the ships. Tit-bits of information which might convey something in return for a few coins. The door opened and Adam Pascoe stood inside the cabin, his hat tucked under his arm. Bolitho stood up and walked towards him, feeling something like pain as he saw the way the youth was holding his arm away from his ribs. Even in his lieutenant’s uniform he looked the same lean boy who had first been sent to him as a midshipman. He said, “Welcome aboard, sir.” Bolitho forgot the weight of his new responsibility, his unwanted clash with Herrick, everything but the youth who had come to mean so much. He embraced him and said, “You’ve been in trouble, Adam. I am sorry it was of my doing.” Pascoe watched him gravely. “I would not have killed him, Uncle.” Bolitho stood back from him and smiled sadly. “No, Adam, but he might have finished you. Eighteen years is a beginning, not an end.” Pascoe pushed the black hair from his forehead and shrugged. “The captain has given me enough extra duties
 for my pains.” He looked at Bolitho’s shoulder. “How is the wound, Uncle?” “Forgotten.” He led him to a chair. “Like your own, eh?” They smiled like conspirators as Bolitho poured two glasses of claret. He noticed that Pascoe’s hair was cut in the new style, without any queue at the nape of his neck like most sea officers. He wondered what sort of a navy it would be when his nephew’s broad pendant flew one day. Pascoe sipped the wine. “They are saying in the squadron that this command would have been Nelson’s had he not lost his arm.” He watched him questioningly. Bolitho smiled. There were few secrets in the fleet. “Perhaps.” Pascoe nodded, his eyes distant. “A great honour, Uncle, but—” “But what?” “A great responsibility also.” Herrick reappeared at the door. “May I ask what time you would wish the other captains to return aboard, sir?” He looked from one to the other and felt strangely moved. About twenty years between them, yet they looked like brothers. Bolitho replied, “I will leave it to you.” When Herrick had gone Pascoe asked simply, “Is anything between you and Captain Herrick, Uncle?” Bolitho touched his arm. “Nothing that can harm our friendship, Adam.” Pascoe appeared satisfied. “I’m glad.” Bolitho reached for the decanter. “Now, tell me what you have been doing since I last saw you.” 2 SMALL BEGINNING BOLITHO moved restlessly around his day cabin, one hand reaching out to touch objects not yet familiar. Around and above him the Lysander’s seventeen hundred tons of timbers and spars, artillery and men creaked and groaned to the pressure of a rising north-westerly wind. He had to forcibly restrain himself from peering from one or other of the quarter windows to see how the rest of his squadron were getting on with preparations for weighing. He heard occasional shouts and the thump of bare feet as seamen raced in all directions to complete last minute tasks, and he could picture Herrick as he, too, fretted over each delay. It was all Bolitho could do to leave Herrick alone on the quarterdeck. As a captain, Bolitho had been made to take his ships to sea in every sort of condition. From a lively sloop to the towering three-decker Euryalus in which he had been flag captain he had experienced the anxious moments before the anchor broke from the sea bed. For Herrick it would be much the same, if not worse. To look at a captain on his own quarterdeck, remote and aloof from the bustle and confusion all around him, protected from criticism by his authority and his gleaming epaulettes, any idler might think he was beyond ordinary fears and feelings. Bolitho had thought much in that way when he had been a junior lieutenant, or for that matter a midshipman. A captain had been a sort of god. He had lived an unreachable existence beyond his cabin bulkhead, and had but to scowl to have every officer and seaman quaking. But now, like Herrick, he knew differently. The greater the responsibility the greater the honour. Equally, you had further to fall from grace if things went badly. Allday came into the cabin and rubbed his large hands. There were droplets of spray on his blue jacket, and he had a kind of wildness in his eyes. He too, was feeling it. Eager to quit the land again. Like a hunter who goes to pit his strength against the unknown. Needing to do it, but never knowing if each time was the last. The coxswain grinned. “They’re doing well, sir. I’ve just been up to the boat tier to watch over your barge. There’s a fair breeze from the nor’-west. The squadron will make a goodly sight when we beat clear of the Rock.” Bolitho tensed, his head to one side as something clattered and dragged along the deck above. A voice bellowed harshly, “Belay that line, you bugger!” He bit his lip, imagining all manner of things going wrong. Allday watched him thoughtfully. “Cap’n Herrick will see us clear, sir.” “I know.” He nodded as if to seal the conviction. “I know.”

THE frigate Harvester, nine days outward bound from Spithead, turned easily into the gentle offshore breeze and dropped anchor, the echoes of her gun salute reverberating and grumbling around the towering wall of Gibraltar’s unchanging Rock. Her young captain let his eye rest a moment longer on the busy activity below the quarterdeck as his men threw themselves into the work of swaying out boats, urged on by sharp commands and more than one cuff from an impatient petty officer. Entering harbour was always a tense moment, and the captain knew that he was not the only one aboard who was aware of the big ships of the line anchored nearby, the largest of which wore a vice-admiral’s flag at the fore, and no doubt there were several telescopes already trained on his small command ready to reprimand or criticise. With a final glance he strode aft and crossed to the starboard side where a tall, solitary figure leaned against the hammock nettings. “Shall I signal for a boat, sir? Or would one of mine be sufficient?” Captain Richard Bolitho pulled himself from his thoughts and turned to face the other man. “Thank you. Captain Leach, I will take yours. It will save time.” He imagined he saw a touch of relief in the man’s eyes, and realised that it could not have been easy for so young and junior a captain, who had not yet attained the coveted post rank, to carry him from England as a passenger. He relaxed slightly and added, “You have a fine ship. We made a quick passage.” He shivered in spite of the early morning sunlight and saw Leach watching him with new interest. But what could he understand of Bolitho’s feelings? While the frigate had beaten down the English Channel and round Brest, where once more the British squadrons rode out all weathers to watch over a blockaded French fleet, Bolitho’s thoughts had reached far beyond the plunging bowsprit to this moment only. Down across the Bay, with its blustering winds and savage currents, and still further south until the coast of Portugal loomed like a blue mist far abeam. He had had plenty of time to think of what lay ahead, of his new command, and all that she might come to mean to him. In his solitary walks on the frigate’s spray-dashed quarter-deck he had been conscious of his role as a mere passenger, and more than once had had to check himself from interfering in the running of the ship. Now, beneath the Rock’s great shadow, he must push such thoughts out of his mind. He was no longer a frigate captain with all the independence and dash that post entailed. Within minutes he would take command of a ship of the line, one of those which swung so calmly and so confidently above their reflections just two cables distant. He made himself look squarely at the one which lay astern of the flagship. A two-decker, one of the seventy-four-gun ships which made up the backbone of England’s far-stretched squadrons. The frigate beneath his feet moved restlessly even within the calm waters of the anchorage, her tapered top-masts spiralling against the washed-out blue sky, her rigging humming as if from impatience at the very necessity of being near her heavier consorts. By comparison the two-decker looked squat and unmoving, her towering masts and yards, her double line of ports, adding to her appearance of ponderous power, around which the busy harbour craft scurried like so many water-beetles. The other man watched the gig being rowed round to the entry port and saw Bolitho’s coxswain standing beside a pile of personal luggage like a thickset dog guarding his master’s most prized possessions. He said, “You’ve a good man there, sir.” Bolitho followed his glance and smiled. “Allday has been with me since . . .” His mind went back over the years without effort, as if every thought and each memory was always lying in wait like a half-forgotten picture. He said abruptly, “My first coxswain was killed at the Saintes in ’ 82 . Allday has been with me ever since.” Just a few words of explanation, yet how much more they meant to Bolitho, just as Allday’s familiar shape was a constant reminder. Now the Saintes and the frigate Phalarope were eleven years in the past, and England was at war again. Leach watched Bolitho’s grave face and wondered. During the uneventful voyage from Spithead he had wanted to confide with him, but something had stopped him. He had brought plenty of other passengers to Gibraltar and usually they made a pleasant diversion in the daily routine. Officers for the garrison, couriers and replacements for men killed by accident or design in a war which was already spreading in every direction. But something in Bolitho’s impassive, almost withdrawn manner had deterred him from close contact. He looked at him now with a mixture of interest and envy. Bolitho was a senior captain and about to take a step which with any luck at all would place him on the list for flag rank within a few years, maybe only months. From what Bolitho had said he guessed him to be in his middle or late thirties. He was tall and surprisingly slim, and when he smiled his face became equally youthful. It was said that Bolitho had been away for several years between the wars in the Great South Sea and had come back half dead with fever. It was probably true, he decided. There were deep lines at the corners of his mouth, and beneath the even tan there was a certain fineness to the skin and cheekbones which betrayed such an illness. But the hair which was pulled back to the nape of his neck was black, without even a touch of grey, and the one lock which curled down above his right eye added to his appearance of controlled recklessness. A lieutenant touched his hat, “Boat’s ready, sir.” Bolitho held out his hand. “Well, goodbye for the present, Leach. No doubt we will meet again directly.” The frigate’s captain smiled for the first time. “I hope so, sir.” He snapped his fingers with sudden irritation. “I almost forgot! There is a midshipman aboard who is also appointed to your ship. Will he go across with you?” He spoke carelessly, as if he were discussing a piece of unwanted baggage, and Bolitho grinned in spite of his inner anxiety. “We were all midshipmen once, Leach.” He nodded. “He can come with me.” Bolitho climbed down the ladder to the entry port where the bosun’s mates and marines were assembled to see him over the side. His boxes had already vanished, and Allday was waiting by the bulwark, his eyes watching Bolitho as he knuckled his forehead and reported, “All stowed, Captain.” Bolitho nodded. There was something very reassuring about Allday. He was no longer the lithe topman he had once been. He had filled out now, so that in his blue jacket and wide duck trousers he looked muscular and unbreakable, like a rock. But his eyes were still the same. Half thoughtful, half amused. Yes, it was good to have him here today. Then Bolitho saw the midshipman. He got a quick impression of a pale, delicate face and a thin, gangling body which did not seem able to hold still. It was odd that he had not seen him before within the close world of the frigate, he thought. As if reading his mind Leach said shortly, “He’s been seasick for most of the voyage.” Bolitho asked kindly, “What is your name, boy?” The midshipman began, “S-S-Seton, sir.” Then he lapsed into blushing silence. Leach said unfeelingly, “He stutters, too. I suppose we must take all kinds in times like these.” Bolitho hid a smile. “Quite so.” He waited a moment and then added, “Well, Mr Seton, you go down into the boat first, if you please.” He saw the boy’s mind wrestling with this early complication in his new career and then said, “Carry on, Allday.” He hardly heard the twitter of pipes or the harsh bark of commands, and only when the gig had moved clear of the frigate’s hull and the oars sent her skimming across the unbroken water did he permit himself another glance at his new ship. Allday followed his stare, and said quietly, “Well there she is, Captain. The old Hyperion. ”
 As the little gig pulled steadily over the blue water Bolitho concentrated his full attention on the anchored Hyperion. Allday had perhaps made his comment without thought, yet his words seemed to jar another chord in Bolitho’s mind as if to rule out this further meeting as mere coincidence. Hyperion was an old ship, for it was twenty-one years since her keel had first tasted salt water, and Bolitho’s rational mind told him that it was inevitable he should see her from time to time as his service carried him from one part of the world to the next. Yet whenever his mind and body had been tried to the limit it now seemed as if this old ship of the line had somehow been close by. At the bloody battles of the Chesapeake, and again at the Saintes, when his own beloved frigate had almost been pounded into submission, he had seen her blunt bows thrusting through the thickest of the smoke, her sides flashing with gunfire and sails pockmarked with holes as she fought to hold her place in the line. He narrowed his grey eyes as the sunlight lanced up from the water and threw a pattern of dancing reflections across the ship’s tall side. He knew that she had been in steady commission now for over three years and had returned home from the West Indies with high hopes for a quick pay-off and well-earned rest both for herself and her company. But while Hyperion had sailed serenely on her peacetime affairs in the Caribbean sunlight and Bolitho had fought wretchedly against a consuming fever in his house at Falmouth, the clouds of war had gathered once more across Europe. The bloody revolution which had seized France from coast to coast had at first been viewed with nervous excitement from across the English Channel, a human reaction of people who watch an old enemy weakened from within without cost to themselves, but as the fury spread and the stories filtered back to England of a new, even more powerful nation emerging from the din of execution squads and mob carnage, those who had known danger and fear in the past accepted the inevitability of yet another war. Followed by an anxious and protesting Allday, Bolitho had left his bed and had made his way to London. He had always detested the false gaiety of the town, with its sprawling, dirty streets and the contrasting splendour of its great houses, but he had made up his mind that if necessary he would bend his knee and plead for a new ship. After weeks of fretting and fruitless interviews he had been given the task of recruiting unwilling inhabitants of the Medway towns to fill the ships which were at last being called into commission. To the senior powers of the Admiralty whose immediate duty it was to expand and equip a depleted fleet Bolitho was a clever choice for the work of recruitment. His exploits as a young frigate captain were still well remembered, and when war came his was the kind of leadership which might win men from the land for the uncertainties and hardships of a life at sea. Unfortunately Bolitho did not view his appointment with the same enthusiasm. It was somehow characteristic of his make-up that he saw it as a lack of confidence and trust by his superiors whom he suspected of thinking the worst about his recent illness. A sick captain could be a danger. Not just to himself and his ship, but to the vital chain of command, which once weakened could bring disaster and defeat. The following January England had reeled from the news that the King of France had been beheaded by his own people, and before their minds could adjust to the shock the new French National Convention declared war. It was as if the fury of the whole French nation had shaken the country from the course of reason. Even Spain and Holland, old allies from the past, had received the same declaration, and now, like England, stood awaiting the first real onslaught. And so the old Hyperion had sailed again with hardly a pause in harbour. To Brest and the inevitable lot of the Channel Squadron to blockade and watch over the French ships sheltering beneath the guns of the shore batteries. Bolitho had continued with his task, his despair at not being given an immediate command only helping to play fresh havoc with his health. Then as winter gave way to spring he had received his orders to proceed to Spithead and take passage for Gibraltar. As he sat in the stern of the gig he could feel the heavy envelope in his breast pocket, the authority to control and command this ship which now towered above him and reduced all else to insignificance. Already he could hear the twitter of pipes, the stampede of bare feet and the clatter of muskets as she prepared to receive him. He wondered briefly how long they had awaited his appearance, whether or not his arrival would be greeted with pleasure or misgivings. It was one thing to take command from another captain who was leaving for promotion or retirement, quite another to step into a dead man’s shoes. The gig rounded the high bows and Bolitho stared up at the bright overhanging figurehead. Like the rest of the paintwork the figurehead’s gilt looked fresh and clean which was one small sign of a well-run ship. Hyperion the Sun God carried an out-thrust trident and was crowned with the rising sun itself. Only a pair of staring blue eyes broke the sheen of gold, and Bolitho found time to wonder how many of the King’s enemies had seen that gilt face through the smoke and had died minutes later. He looked round as he heard something like a gasp and saw the thin midshipman staring up at the towering masts and furled sails. His face seemed full of dread, and the hand which gripped the boat’s gunwale was stiff like a claw. Bolitho asked quietly, “How old are you, Mr Seton?” The boy tore his eyes from the ship and muttered, “S-Sixteen, sir.” Bolitho nodded gravely. “Well, I was about your age when I joined a ship very like this one. That was the year Hyperion was built.” He gave a wry smile. “And as you see, Mr Seton, we are both still here!” He saw the emotions chasing each other across the midshipman’s pale face and was glad he had omitted to add that the occasion he had described had been his second ship. At that time, and from the age of twelve, he had been constantly at sea. He wondered why Seton’s father had left it so late before sending him into the Navy. He straightened his back as the boat shot forward towards the entry port and a voice rang out, “Boat ahoy?” Allday cupped his hands and yelled, “Hyperion!” If doubt there had been, there was none now. Every man aboard would know that the straight-backed figure in the gold-laced hat was his new master, the man who, next to God, held complete sway over every life in his ship. One who could flog or hang, just as he could equally reward and recognise the faults or efforts of everybody under his hand. As the oars were tossed and the bowman hooked on to the main chains it took all of Bolitho’s self-control to hold himself motionless in the sternsheets. Strangely, it was the seasick midshipman who broke the spell. He made to scramble towards the side, but Allday growled, “Not yet, my young gentleman!” He pulled him back to his seat and added, “Seniors are last in the boat but first out, got it?” Bolitho stared at each of them and then forgot them. Pulling his sword against his thigh, for once he had witnessed a new captain falling headlong backwards into his barge, he climbed stiffly up through the curved and gilded entry port. As he removed his hat he was almost overwhelmed by the immediate response which seemed to come from every side, from above and below his bared head. The greeting which had started with the shrill scream of pipes as his face had appeared over the side burst into a wild crescendo of noise which at first his mind had difficulty in sorting out. The drums and fifes of a small marine band, the slap and snap of muskets being brought to the present and the swish of swords completing the general salute. He felt hemmed in by the scarlet ranks of marines, the blue and white of assembled officers, and, above all, the packed faces and pigtailed heads of the men who had been hurriedly called from their duties throughout the ship. He should have been ready, but in his heart he knew he had been so long in frigates that this sudden upsurge of figures had caught him entirely off guard. As his mind accepted this and his eye moved quickly over the nearest rank of shining guns, the freshly holystoned planking and the taut web of rigging and shrouds, he became aware, perhaps for the first time, of his new responsibility. Up to this instant he had been considering the Hyperion only as a different way of life. Now, as the band fell into sudden silence and a tall, grave-faced lieutenant stepped forward to meet him, he understood his real purpose. The realisation both surprised and humbled him. Here within her fat, one-hundred-eighty-foot hull the Hyperion contained a whole new world. A strange imprisoned existence in which some six hundred officers and men lived, worked and, if required, died together, yet stayed apart in their own segments of discipline and seniority. It was hardly surprising that many captains of such ships as Hyperion were overwhelmed by their sense of power and self-importance. He realised that the tall officer was watching him intently, his face set in an expressionless mould. He said, “Lieutenant Quarme, sir. I am the senior aboard.” Bolitho nodded. “Thank you, Mr Quarme.” He reached inside his coat and drew out his commission. The noise and sudden excitement had left him feeling faint. After the weeks of waiting and fretting all at once he needed to find the privacy of his new quarters. This Quarme looked a competent enough officer, he thought. He had a sudden picture of Herrick, his old first lieutenant in the Phalarope and the Tempest, and wished with his heart that he and not Quarme had stepped
 forward to greet him. Quarme moved quietly along the rank of officers, murmuring names and adding small additions about their duties. Bolitho kept his face quite impassive. It was far too early for smiles and general acknowledgments. The real men would emerge later from behind these stiff, respectful faces. But they seemed a general enough collection, he decided vaguely, but so many of them after a frigate. He walked along the rank, past the lieutenants and senior warrant officers to where the midshipmen waited with fascinated attention. He thought of young Seton and wondered what he was thinking of this awesome spectacle. Terrified, most likely. Two marine officers stood rigidly before the scarlet ranks with their white crossbelts and silver buttons, and across the main press of figures beyond were the other warrant officers, the professionals who decided whether a ship would live or die. The boatswain and the carpenter, the cooper and all the rest. He felt the sun very warm across his check and hurriedly opened his papers. He saw the watching figures crowd forward to hear and see better, and others dropped their eyes as he looked towards them, as if afraid of making a bad impression at such an early moment. He read the commission briskly and without emotion. It was addressed to Richard Bolitho, Esquire, from Samuel Hood, Admiral of the Red, and required him to take upon him the charge and command of captain in His Britannic Majesty’s ship Hyperion. Most of the men had heard such commissions read before, some no doubt many times, yet as he read through the neat, formal phrases he was conscious of the silence. As if the whole ship were holding her breath. Bolitho rolled up the papers and returned them to his pocket. From one corner of his eye he saw Allday move slightly aft towards the quarterdeck ladder. As always he was ready to mark the way for his retreat from formality and discomfort. In spite of the sun across the tops of the hammock nettings he felt light-headed and suddenly chilled. But he gritted his teeth and forced himself to remain quite motionless in front of the marines. This was a crucial moment in his life. His impression on his men might later decide their fate as well as his own. He had a sudden, sickening picture of himself falling in a fresh bout of fever with every eye watching his disgrace and humiliation, and surprisingly the mental scene helped to steady him. He raised his voice. “I will not keep you long from your duties, as there is much to do. The water lighters will be alongside directly, for I intend to hold this favourable wind and make sail this afternoon.” He saw two of the lieutenants exchange quick glances and added in a harder note, “My orders require me to take this ship and join Lord Hood’s squadron off Toulon without delay. Once there we will make every effort to contain the enemy within his harbours, but if possible, and whenever possible, we will seek him out and destroy him.” A slight murmur moved through the packed seamen and Bolitho guessed that even up to the last moment when the ship was detached from the Brest blockade and ordered to Gibraltar to receive a new captain many hopeful souls aboard had retained the belief that the Hyperion would be returning home. His words, his new commission, had killed that hope stone dead. Now, with the first fragment of spread canvas and the merest puff of wind, every mile which dragged beneath the weed-covered keel would carry them further and further away from England. For many it might be a one-way journey. He added more calmly. “England is at war with a tyrant. We need every ship and every loyal man to overthrow him. See to it that each one of you does his best. In my part I will do mine.” He turned on his heel and nodded curtly. “Carry on, Mr Quarme. Detail water parties and make sure the purser has plenty of fresh fruit aboard.” He stared across the mist-shrouded bay towards Algeciras. “With Spain our new ally it should not be too difficult.” The first lieutenant touched his hat. Then he called, “Three cheers for King George!” Bolitho walked slowly aft, feeling drained and ice cold. The answering cheers were ready enough, but more from duty than feeling. He climbed the ladder and walked across the spacious quarterdeck. As he lowered his head beneath the poop Allday said quietly, “No need to duck here, sir.” He was grinning. “Plenty of room for you now.” Bolitho did not even hear him. Ignoring the rigid marine sentry he stepped over the coaming and into his wide stern cabin. His private world. He was still thinking of the ship as Allday closed the door and began to unpack one of his boxes.
 Richard Bolitho pushed some of the litter of papers across his desk and sat back to rest his eyes. When he examined his pocket watch he realised with a start that he had been poring over the ship’s books and records for almost six hours without respite, his busy mind conscious the whole time of the noises beyond the closed door and across the deck above.

THE NORMALLY sheltered waters of Portsmouth Harbour seemed to cringe under the intensity of a biting north-easterly which had been blowing for some twelve hours. The whole anchorage was transformed into an endless mass of cruising whitecaps with lively catspaws to mark its progress around the many black-and-buff hulls of moored men-of-war, making them tug violently at their cables. It was late March, a time when winter was still reluctant to release its grip and eager to display its latent power. One of the largest ships, recently warped from the dockyard where she had suffered the indignities of repairs to the lower hull, was the second-rate Black Prince of 94 guns, her fresh paintwork and blacked-down rigging shining like glass from blown spray and a brief rainsquall which even now had reached as far out as the Isle of Wight, a dull blur in the poor light. Black Prince was one of the most powerful of her kind, and to anyone but a true sailor she would appear a symbol of sea-power, the country’s sure shield. The more experienced eye would recognise her empty yards, the canvas not yet sent up to give her life as well as strength. She was surrounded by lighters and dockyard longboats, while small armies of riggers and ropemakers moved busily about her decks, and the clatter of hammers and the squeak of tackles were evidence of the work being carried out in the deep holds and on the gun-decks. Alone by the packed hammock-nettings Black Prince’s captain stood at the quarterdeck rail and watched the comings and goings of seamen and dockyard workers, who in turn were supervised by the ship’s warrant officers, the true backbone of any warship. Captain Valentine Keen tugged his hat still tighter across his fair hair but was otherwise oblivious, even indifferent, to the biting wind and the fact that his flapping blue coat with its tarnished sea-going epaulettes was soaked through to his skin. Without looking, he knew that the men on watch near the deserted double-wheel were very aware of his presence. A quartermaster, a boatswain’s mate and a small midshipman who occasionally raised a telescope to peer at the signal tower or the admiral’s flagship nearby, a sodden flag curling and cracking from her main truck. Many of the men who had served the guns around him when they had fought and all but destroyed the big French three-decker off the coast of Denmark had been taken from his command while the ship had undergone repairs from that short, savage embrace. Some for promotion to other vessels, others because, as the port admiral had put it, “My captains need men now, Captain Keen. You will have to wait.” Keen allowed his mind to stray back over the battle, the terrible sight in the dawn when they had gone to assist Rear-Admiral Herrick’s Benbow in his defence of a twenty-ship convoy destined for the invasion of Copenhagen. Shattered, burning hulks, screaming cavalry horses trapped below in the transports, and Benbow completely dismasted, her only other escort capsized, a total loss. Mercifully Benbow had been towed to the Nore for docking. It would be too painful to see her here every waking day. A constant reminder, especially for Vice-Admiral Sir Richard Bolitho, whose flag would soon break out again from this ship’s foremast. Herrick had been Bolitho’s oldest friend, but Keen had been more angered than saddened by Herrick’s behaviour both before and after Benbow’s last fight. It might well be her last too, he thought grimly. With the many ships they had seized from Copenhagen to bolster their own depleted fleets and squadrons, any dockyard might think twice before committing itself to such a programme of repairs and restoration. Keen thought of Bolitho, a man he cared for more than any other. He had served him as midshipman and lieutenant, and with him in the same squadron until eventually he had become his flag captain. Keen imagined him now with his lovely Catherine, as he had done so often since their return to England. He had tried to close his mind to it, not to make comparisons. But he had wanted a love like theirs for himself, the same challenging passion which had captured the hearts of ordinary people everywhere, and had roused the fury of London society because of their open relationship. A scandal, they proclaimed. Keen sighed. He would give his soul to be in the same position. He walked to the small table beneath the overhang of the dripping poop and opened the log at the place marked with a piece of polished whalebone. He stared at the date on the damp page for several seconds. How could he forget? March 25 th 1808, two months exactly since he had put the ring on the hand of his bride in the tiny village church at Zennor, which had given her her name. Like the battle which had preceded his wedding by four months, it seemed like yesterday. He still did not know. Did she love him, or was her marriage an act of gratitude? He had rescued her from a convict ship, and from transportation for a crime she had not committed. Or did his uncertainty stem from the fact that he was almost twice her age, when he believed she could have chosen anyone? If he did not contain it, Keen knew it would drive him mad. He was almost afraid to touch her, and when she had given herself to him it had been an act without passion, without desire. She had merely submitted, and later during that first night he had found her by the embers of the fire downstairs, sobbing silently as if her heart had already broken. Time and time again Keen had reminded himself of Catherine’s advice when he had visited her in London. He had confessed his doubts about Zenoria’s true feelings for him. Catherine had said quietly, “Remember what happened to her. A young girl—taken and used, with no hope, and nothing to live for.” Keen bit his lip, recalling the day he had first seen her, seized up, almost naked, her back laid open from shoulder to hip while the other prisoners had watched like wild beasts, as if it had been some kind of savage sport. So perhaps it was, after all, gratitude; and he should be satisfied, as many men would be merely to have her. But he was not. He saw the first lieutenant, James Sedgemore, striding aft towards him. He at least seemed more than pleased with his lot. Keen had promoted him to senior lieutenant after the tough Tynesider Cazalet had been cut in half on this same quarterdeck on that terrible morning. The enemy ship had been the San Mateo, a powerful Spaniard sailing under French colours, and she had crushed the convoy and its escorts like a tiger despatching rabbits. Keen had never seen Bolitho so determined to destroy any ship as he had been to put down San Mateo. She had sunk his old Hyperion. He had needed no other reason. Keen often found himself wondering if Bolitho would have held to his threat to keep pouring broadsides into San Mateo, which had already been crippled in the first embrace at close quarters. Until they strike their colours. Thank God someone still sane enough to think and act in that hell of iron and screaming splinters had brought the flags tumbling down. But would he have continued, without mercy, otherwise? I may never know. Lieutenant Sedgemore touched his hat, his face red in the stinging air. “I shall be able to get the sails ready for bending-on tomorrow, sir.” Keen glanced at the Royal Marine sentries by the hatchways and up on the forecastle. With the land so close there were always the reckless few who would try to run. It would be hard enough to get more hands, especially in a naval port, without allowing men the opportunity to desert. Keen had much sympathy for his men. They had been kept aboard or sent directly to other ships to fill the gaps, without any chance to see their loved ones or their homes. Keen had spent more time than was necessary on board, simply to show his depleted company that he was sharing it with them. Even as it crossed his mind, he knew that too was a lie. He had stayed because of his fear that he might make Zenoria openly reject him, unable even to pretend. “Something wrong, sir?” “No.” It came out too sharply. “Vice-Admiral Bolitho will be coming aboard at noon.” He looked across the nettings at the shining walls of the dockyard and harbour battery and on to the huddled buildings of Portsmouth Point, beyond which the Channel and the open sea were waiting. Bolitho might be over there already; at the old George Inn, perhaps? Unlikely. Catherine would be with him. He would not risk a snub or anything else which might distress her. Sedgemore kept his young features impassive. He had never really liked his predecessor, Cazalet. A fine seaman, admittedly, but a man who was so coarse in his speech and behaviour that he had been hard to work with. He watched the bustling figures at the tackles, swaying up more bales and boxes from one of the lighters alongside. Well, he was the first lieutenant now, in one of the navy’s newest and most powerful three-deckers. And with an admiral like Sir Richard Bolitho and a good captain like Keen, there would be no stopping them once they were at sea again. Promotion, prize-money, fame; there was no end to it, in his mind anyway. It was the navy’s way, Sedgemore thought. If a dead man’s shoes were offered, you never waited for a second chance. Keen said distinctly, “Tell my cox’n to prepare the barge, and have the crew piped at six bells. Inspect them yourself, although I doubt if Tojohns will leave anything to chance.” He glanced at the open log again where the midshipman-of-the-watch was writing something, his tongue poking from one corner of his mouth with great concentration. Another picture crossed his mind. His coxswain, Tojohns, on his wedding day only two months ago, supervising the garlanded carriage which had been towed by the midshipmen and petty officers of this ship, his ship, with himself and his young bride inside. He turned
 aft and stalked away beneath the poop to seek the one place he could be alone. Sedgemore watched him go and rubbed his chin thoughtfully. A post-captain—what Sedgemore himself would be one day if everything went well for him, and he managed to avoid Cazalet’s fate. To be captain of a ship like Black Prince . . . He looked up and around him. There was no higher reward for any man. He would want for nothing. He saw the midshipman staring at him and rasped, “Mr M’Innes, I’ll trouble you not to waste your time, sir!” It was uncalled for; but it made him feel more like a first lieutenant. Lieutenant Stephen Jenour caught his breath as he turned the corner above the shining dockyard stairs which led directly down to the landing stage. After two months ashore either working for Vice-Admiral Sir Richard Bolitho or visiting his parents in Southampton, he felt at odds with the sea and the bitter wind. He thrust open a small door and saw a blazing fire shining a welcome across the room. A uniformed servant asked coldly, “Your name, sir?” “Jenour.” He added sharply, “Flag lieutenant to Sir Richard Bolitho.” The man bowed himself away, muttering something about a warming drink, and Jenour was childishly pleased at his ability to command instant respect. “Welcome, Stephen.” Bolitho was sitting in a high-backed chair, the fire reflecting from his gold lace and epaulettes. “We have a while yet.” Jenour sat down and smiled at him. So many things had changed his young life since joining Bolitho. His parents had laughed at him for vowing that one day he would serve this incredible man who had been, until Nelson’s death at Trafalgar less than three years ago, the second youngest vice-admiral on the Navy List. Now he was the youngest. He never tired of recalling each separate incident, even that stark moment when Black Prince had been about to leave Copenhagen in search of Herrick, and Bolitho had turned on him in pleading desperation and confirmed his worst fears. “I am losing my sight, Stephen. Can you keep a secret so precious to me?” And later when Bolitho had said, “ They must not know. You are a dear friend, Stephen. Now there are other friends out there who need us.” Jenour sipped the hot drink. There was brandy in it, and spices too, and his eyes smarted but he knew it was from that memory and nothing else. A dear friend, and one of the few who knew the extent of the injury to Bolitho’s left eye. To be entrusted with such a secret was a reward greater than anything he had believed possible. He asked carefully, “What will Captain Keen’s answer be, Sir Richard?” Bolitho put down his empty goblet and thought of Catherine, imagined he could still feel the warmth of her body in his arms as they had parted this morning. She would be well on her way to London now, to the house she had bought by the river in Chelsea. Their private place as she had called it, where they could be alone together when they were required to be in the capital. It was strange to be without Allday, but his coxswain—his “oak”—had gone with Yovell, his secretary, and Ozzard his little servant, in the same coach. Catherine was fearless, but Bolitho felt safer on her behalf knowing that she travelled with such a staunch escort. He thought too of his last interview with Lord Godschale at the Admiralty, and Godschale’s attempts to soothe him whenever he touched on a point which might provoke controversy. “Their lordships insist that you are the best choice of flag officer to go to Cape Town. You had, after all, a vital part in taking it from the Dutch—our people know you and trust you accordingly. It should not take long, but it needs your handling to establish regular patrols of smaller craft in the area, and perhaps to send more of the major men-of-war back to England. When you have installed a post-captain in overall charge there—acting-commodore if you like—you can return too. I will offer you a fast frigate, and do everything possible for you.” He had given the great sigh of one overburdened with responsibility. “Even while Admiral Gambier and your own squadron were in Copenhagen preparing the prizes for their passage here, Napoleon was already busy elsewhere. God damn the fellow—twice he has attempted to seize the Danish fleet, and he has even provoked Turkey to turn against his old ally the Tsar of Russia. As fast as we seal one door, he explores another.” It was difficult not to admire Napoleon’s ever-changing strategy, Bolitho had often conceded. Shortly after Herrick’s hopeless fight to save his convoy, the French army had invaded Portugal, and by November was in Lisbon, with the royal family in flight to their possessions in Brazil. It was rumoured in Whitehall that Spain, another ally if an unwilling one, would be Napoleon’s next target. He would then become a ruler of overwhelming strength, a threat once again with all the riches of Spain to support him. Bolitho had said, “I think that this time he may have overreached himself. He has turned Portugal into an enemy, and will surely incite Spain to rise against him. It will be our one chance. A place to land an army where it will find friendship, and be treated as a liberation force.” Godschale had looked distant. “Perhaps, perhaps.” Another secret. Jenour knew; so did Yovell and Allday. Bolitho had refused to take passage in a frigate and had seen Godschale’s heavy features go almost purple as he had exclaimed, “Do you mean to say that you are going to take Lady Catherine Somervell with you on passage to Cape Town?” Bolitho had been adamant. “A ship of war is no place for a lady, my lord. Although I am sure Lady Catherine would accept without hesitation.” Godschale had mopped his face. “I will arrange it. A fast packet under Admiralty warrant. You are a damned difficult fellow to deal with, Sir Richard. What people will say when they discover—” “We shall simply have to ensure they do not, my lord.” When he had told Catherine she had been surprisingly excited about it. “To be there with you, dearest of men, instead of reading of your exploits in the Gazette, to be part of it all . . . I ask for nothing more.” The door opened and the servant peered in at them. “I beg your pardon, Sir Richard, but it is reported that your barge has just left Black Prince. ” Bolitho nodded and remarked to Jenour, “I’ll wager Captain Keen will be surprised to find that I am not staying aboard.” Jenour followed him from the snug shelter of the senior officers’ waiting room. He knew that Keen cared for Bolitho as much as he did himself. Would he leave Black Prince in exchange for some obscure position in Cape Town as captain in command of all local patrols? It would mean a broad-pendant, and the real possibility of promotion to rear-admiral after that, if everything went well. But it would also mean leaving his bride behind so soon after their marriage, as well as severing his close links with the man who was even now standing at the top of the dripping stairs, peering across the tossing array of whitecaps. I am fortunate that the choice is not mine. Not yet, in any case . . . Bolitho pulled his boat-cloak around his body and watched the green-painted barge pulling lustily across the choppy water, the oars rising and falling as one, the bargemen very smart in their checkered shirts and tarred hats. Keen’s coxswain would be in charge today, and Bolitho was suddenly uneasy, knowing that Allday would not be there. He thought of Catherine’s happiness at the prospect of their journey, when before, when he had told her about Cape Town, there had been only anger and despair. “Is there nobody else they can send, Richard? Must it always be you?” When Godschale’s acceptance of his request that she accompany him had been delivered to Falmouth, she had thrown her arms about him like a child. Together. The word which had become a symbol to both of them. Ever since Keen’s wedding they seemed to have spent days on the terrible winter roads: London, Falmouth and London again. He thought of their last night at a small secluded inn Allday had recommended; as, seated in the waiting room before Jenour had arrived, he had stared into the fire, remembering it. The need of one for the other, until they had lain by the fire in the inn’s private room, unwilling to waste the night in sleep. The bargemen tossed their oars and sat stiffly facing aft while the bows were made fast to the stairs. The first lieutenant stepped lightly on to the wet stairs and raised his hat, his eyes everywhere, puzzled as he realised there was no chest or luggage to be stowed aboard. “Good day, Mr Sedgemore.” Bolitho gave a brief smile. “As you see, mine is a short visit this time.” He and Jenour settled themselves in the sternsheets and the barge cast off, shipping water over the stem as they quit the shelter of the wall. “Repairs going well, Mr Sedgemore?” The lieutenant swallowed hard. He was unused to casual conversation with a vice-admiral. “Aye, Sir Richard. It will be a month or so yet, I’m told.” Bolitho watched the passing dockyard boats, and a yawl towing a new mast for some ship undergoing refit. If Napoleon did invade Spain, the naval blockade would have to be tighter than ever until they could put an army ashore to meet the French in open battle. He thought sadly of Herrick. Even his poor, battered Benbow might be sent back into the fray. He heard the distant crack of a musket, and saw figures running on to Black Prince’s forecastle; he guessed that a marine had just fired on a would-be deserter. Sedgemore said between his teeth, “I think they got him.” Bolitho looked at him calmly. “Would it not be more useful to put your pickets on the foreshore and catch them if they swim there? A corpse is little use for anything, I’d have thought.” It was mildly said, but Jenour saw the first lieutenant wince as if he had been hit in the face. The next few moments put all
 else from his mind. The climb up the slippery side, the trill of calls and the stamp and crash of the Royal Marines’ guard of honour. Then Keen, his handsome features full of welcome as he stepped forward to greet him. They shook hands, and Keen guided him aft to the great cabin. “Well, Val?” Bolitho sat down and looked at his friend. “You will not be hampered by me again just yet.” He watched Keen pouring claret, noting the lines around his mouth. Strain of command. The many, many difficulties of completing a refit and putting right the wounds of battle. Making up a depleted company, storing, taking on powder and shot, preparing new watch-bills to eke out the experienced hands among the volunteers and pressed men. Bolitho had known all these challenges even in his first command, a small sloop-of-war. “It is good to see you.” Keen offered him a goblet. “Your visit sounds something of a mystery.” He smiled, but it did not reach his eyes. “And how is Zenoria? Missing you, no doubt?” Keen turned away and fumbled with his keys. “There was a despatch delivered on board this morning, sir. It came by posthorse from the Admiralty.” He opened a drawer and took it out. “I forgot, in the excitement of your arrival.” Bolitho took it and glanced at the seal. Something was wrong. Catherine had hinted as much. He said, “I am ordered to Cape Town, Val, to ensure there is no further complacency. We need more local patrols than ever now that the anti-slavery bill has been passed in Parliament. Slavers, pirates, privateers—they will all need seeking out.” Keen stared at him as if he had not heard properly. Bolitho added quietly, “They require an experienced postcaptain to command there. He will have the broad-pendant of commodore for his pains. I will return to Black Prince eventually, but if you accept this appointment, you will not.” “I, sir?” Keen put down his goblet without seeing it. “Quit Black Prince? ” He looked up, his eyes full of dismay. “And leave you, sir?” Bolitho smiled. “This war is coming to a crisis, Val. We must put an army into Europe. We shall need our best leaders when that time comes. You are an obvious choice—you’ve earned it ten times over, and the fleet will need flag officers like you now that Our Nel is dead.” He recalled the general he had met just before they had managed to retake Cape Town. Despite all the triumphs at sea, they will be as nought until the English foot-soldier plants his boots on the enemy’s own shores. Keen walked to the spray-streaked stern windows and stared down at the distorted waves beneath the counter. “When might this be, sir?” He sounded dazed by the sudden turn of events. Trapped. “Soon. Black Prince, I am assured, will be in dockyard hands for some while yet.” Keen turned. “Advise me, sir.” Bolitho took a knife and slit open the thick envelope. “I know what it means to be parted from a lover. But it is the lot of every sea officer. It is also his duty to seize any opportunity for advancement, to which he is truly suited, and from which his country may benefit.” Keen looked away. “I would like to accept, sir.” He did not even hesitate. Bolitho read quickly through the neat lettering and said gravely, “You have a further duty while you hold command here, Val.” He tossed the letter on to the table. “There has been a court of enquiry at the Governor’s house here in Portsmouth. Their lordships have decided that Rear-Admiral Herrick must stand trial at a court martial on the prescribed date.” Keen picked up the letter. “Misconduct and neglect of duty . . .” He did not continue. “My God, sir.” “Read on. The court martial will be held here in Black Prince, your command and my flagship.” Keen nodded, understanding at last. “Then I am eager for the Cape, sir.” He finished with sudden bitterness, “I will not be needed here.” Bolitho took his hat from the cabin servant. Then he said, “When you are ready, Val, please tell me . . . tell us. It is what true friends are for.” Keen seemed to search his face for something. “That I shall never forget.” “I am depending on it.” He hesitated, hearing the marine guard stamping into line at the entry port. “Your pain is mine, as mine has too often been yours.” Ebenezer Julyan, the sailing-master, was loitering by the wheel, and Bolitho guessed he had been waiting purposely to see him. As though it were yesterday, he recalled Julyan’s grin of pleasure as they had sailed to meet the towering San Mateo, when Bolitho had given him his own gold-laced hat to wear to make the enemy believe that Black Prince was a Danish prize. He called, “Did you give that hat to your boy, Mr Julyan?” The man laughed. “I did that, sir. It made a rare stir in th’ village! It be good to see ’ee again, Sir Richard!” Bolitho looked round at other familiar faces, who had also faced death that day. He thought too of Keen’s bitter comments; then he touched the silver locket through his shirt, the one she had fastened around his neck this morning as she always did when they were to be parted, even for a few hours. May Fate always guide you. May Love always protect you. With Keen so downcast, it seemed wrong to think of all the happiness she had given him. Catherine, Lady Somervell, walked to the window with its small iron balcony and looked out across the swirling Thames. The city had been wide awake by the time her mud-spattered carriage had clattered to a halt outside this small, elegant house in Chelsea, the streets full of traders and carters from the various markets hawking meat, fish, vegetables, all a reminder of the London she had known as a very young girl; the London she had shown in part to Bolitho. It had been a long hard journey on that appalling road, past leafless trees stark against a cold moon, and splashing through a downpour an hour later. They had stopped every so often to eat and drink, but not until Bolitho’s portly Devonian secretary Yovell had inspected each inn to make certain it was suitable for her to enter. Several times he had climbed back into the carriage, grimly shaking his head to signal Matthew to drive on. They had looked after her wonderfully, she thought. They had refilled her copper foot-warmer with boiling water at each stop, and ensured that she had been well wrapped in rugs as well as her long velvet cloak, and independent though she was, she had been glad of their company. The house felt strange after Falmouth, damp and unfamiliar, and she was thankful for the fires blazing in most of the rooms. She thought of the grey Bolitho house below Pendennis Castle, and was still strangely surprised that she could miss it so much when she was away from it. She heard Allday laugh in the kitchen, and somebody, probably the faithful, silent little Ozzard, putting logs on one of the fires. Once during the journey on a comparatively smooth stretch of road, when Yovell had fallen asleep and Ozzard had been outside on the coachman’s box, she had engaged Allday in conversation, listening intently as he had answered her questions and spoken of his early days with the man she loved. The ships and the battles, although she knew he had skirted around the latter. He never tried to shock or impress her, and he seemed to feel free enough to speak with her on equal terms, almost as a friend. When she had asked him about Herrick, he had been more wary. “I first knew him as one of the Cap’n lieutenants in the old Phalarope— back in eighty-two, it was.” He had given his lazy grin. “Course, I didn’t exactly volunteer, so to speak.” It seemed to amuse him. “When the Cap’n finally left Phalarope he took us with him, me an’ Bryan Ferguson. Then I became his cox’n.” He had shaken his head like a big shaggy dog. “Lot of water since them days.” Then he had looked at her very directly. “Rear-Admiral Herrick is a stubborn man, begging your pardon, m’lady. An honest gentleman, an’ that’s rare enough these days, but . . .” Catherine had watched his uncertainty. “Sir Richard is deeply concerned about him. His oldest friend, would you say?” It had given Allday the time he needed. “Next to me, m’lady! But folk don’t change, no matter what their circumstances. Sir Richard never has. A flag officer he may be, a hero to most people he certainly is, but he’s no different to the young cap’n I saw in tears at the death of a friend.” “You must tell me that too, Allday. There are so many gaps I want . . . I need to fill.” The carriage had lurched into a deep rut and Yovell had awakened with a startled grunt. “Where are we?” But Allday had looked at her in that same level way, as he had at English Harbour when her husband had been alive, and Bolitho had become her lover again after their stupid separation. “I’ll tell you, m’lady, don’t you fret. This passage we’re makin’ to the Cape will show you the man we sees, not the one who comes home from the ocean. The King’s officer.” She heard herself laugh. “I do believe you are filling in your own gaps about me, Allday!” Now for a few more moments she was alone in the room where they had loved so demandingly, as if they were trying to make up for the lost years. She thought of Valentine Keen, his troubled face when he had spoken to her of his hopes and fears for his marriage to Zenoria. Another mystery: so close a band of brothers—poor Oliver Browne’s “happy few”—and yet there was a coldness between Herrick and Keen. Because of Bolitho, or because of Zenoria? She had never mentioned to Richard what she had seen in Adam’s face at Keen’s wedding. She might after all have been mistaken. In the same heartbeat, she knew she was not; she was too experienced not to recognise that Adam, Richard’s nephew and the nearest to a son he would ever know, was in love with Keen’s Zenoria. But Adam was a captain now, albeit a very young one, and his first frigate, the Anemone, was somewhere at sea with the Channel Fleet. It was just as well, at least until things
 settled down again. She tossed away her cloak and gazed at herself critically in a tall mirror. A woman envied, admired and hated. She cared for none of it. She saw only the woman who was loved by England’s hero. The man. She smiled, remembering Allday’s sage-like confidences. Not the King’s officer. She was waiting for Bolitho when he reached the house in the late evening, although she had had no forewarning of the time of his arrival. He strode through the doors and gave his hat and cloak to the new maidservant, before taking Catherine in his arms. They kissed, and he studied her for several seconds. “Thomas Herrick is to be court-martialled.” She put her arms around his neck. “My news is not good either.” He held her away, searching her face anxiously. “You’re not ill, Kate? What has happened?” She said, “There was a woman here today.” “Who?” “She left a card.” Her voice was husky, almost despairing. “It was ‘expected’ that you might be here, she said.” She looked at him directly. “Your daughter is unwell. The person sent as messenger would tell me nothing further.” Bolitho stared at her, expecting bitterness or resentment. There was neither. It was more an acceptance of something which had always been there, and always would. Catherine said, “You will have to go, Richard. No matter what you feel for your wife, or for what she connived at with my late husband. It is not in your nature or mine to run away.” She touched the cheek near his damaged eye, her voice a whisper so soft that he could barely hear it. “Some may call me the vice-admiral’s whore, but such fools are to be pitied rather than scorned. When you look at me as you are doing now I can barely let you go. And every time you enter me it is as the first time, and I am reborn.” She lifted her chin and he saw the pulse beating in her throat. “But stand between us, my darling Richard? Only death will ever do that.” She turned away and called to Allday, whom she had sensed to be waiting in the hall. “Stay with him—you are his right arm. Under these circumstances I cannot go. It would only harm him.”


AN ADMIRALTY messenger opened the door of a small anteroom and said politely, “If you would be so good as to wait, sir.” He stood aside to allow Captain Richard Bolitho to pass and added, “Sir John knows you are here.” Bolitho waited until the door had closed and then walked to a bright fire which was crackling below a tall mantel. He was thankful that the messenger had brought him to this small room and not to one of the larger ones. As he had hurried into the Admiralty from the bitter March wind which was sweeping down Whitehall he had been dreading a confrontation in one of those crowded waiting-rooms, crammed with unemployed officers who watched the comings and goings of more fortunate visitors with something like hatred. Bolitho had known the feeling, too, even though he had told himself often enough that he was better off than most. For he had come back to England a year ago, to find the country at peace, and the towns and villages already filling with unwanted soldiers and seamen. With his home in Falmouth, an established estate, and all the hard-earned prize money he had brought with him, he knew he should have been grateful. He moved away from the fire and stared down at the broad roadway below the window. It had been raining for most of the morning, but now the sky had completely cleared, so that the many puddles and ruts glittered in the harsh light like patches of pale blue silk. Only the steaming nostrils of countless horses which passed this way and that, the hurrying figures bowed into the wind, made a lie of the momentary colour. He sighed. It was March, 1784, only just over a year since his return home from the West Indies, yet it seemed like a century. Whenever possible he had quit Falmouth to make the long journey to London, to this seat of Admiralty, to try and discover why his letters had gone unanswered, why his pleas for a ship, any ship, had been ignored. And always the waiting-rooms had seemed to get more and more crowded. The familiar voices and tales of ships and campaigns had become forced, less confident, as day by day they were turned away. Ships were laid up by the score, and every seaport had its full quota of a war’s flotsam. Cripples, and men made deaf and blind by cannon fire, others half mad from what they had seen and endured. With the signing of peace the previous year such sights had become too common to mention, too despairing even for hope. He stiffened as two figures turned a corner below the window. Even without the facings on their tattered red coats he knew they had been soldiers. A carriage was standing by the roadside, the horses nodding their heads together as they explored the contents of their feeding bags. The coachman was chatting to a smartly dressed servant from a nearby house, and neither took a scrap of notice of the two tattered veterans. One of them pushed his companion against a stone balustrade and then walked towards the coach. Bolitho realised that the man left clinging to the stonework was blind, his head turned towards the roadway as if trying to hear where his friend had gone. It needed no words. The soldier faced the coachman and his companion and held out his hand. It was neither arrogant nor servile, and strangely moving. The coachman hesitated and then fumbled inside his heavy coat. At that moment another figure ran lightly down some steps and wrenched open the coach door. He was well attired against the cold, and the buckles on his shoes held the watery sunlight like diamonds. He stared at the soldier and then snapped angrily at his coachman. The servant ran to the horses’ heads, and within seconds the coach was clattering away into the busy press of carriages and carts. The soldier stood staring after it and then gave a weary shrug. He returned to his companion, and with linked arms they moved slowly around the next corner. Bolitho struggled with the window catch, but it was stuck fast, his mind reeling with anger and shame at what he had just seen. A voice asked, “May I help, sir?” It was the messenger again. Bolitho replied, “I was going to throw some coins to two crippled soldiers!” He broke off, seeing the mild astonishment in the messenger’s eyes. The man said, “Bless you, sir, you’d get used to such sights in London.” “Not me.” “I was going to tell you, sir, that Sir John will see you now!” Bolitho followed him into the passageway again, conscious of the sudden dryness in his throat. He remembered so clearly his last visit here, a month ago almost to the day. And that time he had been summoned by letter, and not left fretting and fuming in a waiting-room. It had seemed like a dream, an incredible stroke of good fortune. It still did, despite all the difficulties which had been crammed into so short a time. He was to assume command immediately of His Britannic Majesty’s Ship Undine, of thirty-two guns, then lying in the dock- yard at Portsmouth completing a refit. As he had hurried from the Admiralty on that occasion he had felt the excitement on his face like guilt, aware of the other watch- ing eyes, the envy and resentment. The task of taking command, of gathering the dockyard’s re- sources to his aid to prepare Undine for sea, had cost him dearly. With the Navy being cut down to a quarter of its wartime strength he had been surprised to discover that it was harder to obtain spare cordage and spars rather than the reverse. A weary shipwright had confided in him that dockyard officials were more intent on mak- ing a profit with private dealers than they were on aiding one small frigate. He had bribed, threatened and driven almost every man in the yard until he had obtained more or less what he needed. It seemed they saw his departure as the only way of returning to their own affairs. He had walked around his new command in her dock with mixed feelings. Above all, the excitement and the challenge she represented. Gone were the pangs he had felt in Falmouth when- ever he had seen a man-of-war weathering the headland below the castle. But also he had discovered something more. His last com- mand had been Phalarope, a frigate very similar to Undine, if slightly longer by a few feet. To Bolitho she had been everything, perhaps because they had come through so much together. In the West Indies, at the battle of the Saintes he had felt his precious Phalarope battered almost to a hulk beneath him. There would never, could never, be another like her. But as he had walked up and down the stone wall of the dock he had sensed a new elation. Halfway through the hurried overhaul he had received an un- heralded visit from Rear Admiral Sir John Winslade, the man who had greeted him at the Admiralty. He had given little away, but after a cursory inspection of the ship and Bolitho’s preparations he had said, “I can tell you now. I’m sending you to India. That’s all I can reveal for the moment.” He had run his eye over the few riggers working on yards and shrouds and had added dryly, “I only hope for your sake you’ll be ready on time.” There was a lot in what Winslade had hinted. Officers on half- pay were easy to obtain. To crew a King’s ship without the urgency of a war or the pressgang was something else entirely. Had Undine been sailing in better-known waters things might have been differ- ent. And had Bolitho been a man other than himself he might have been tempted to keep her destination a secret until he had signed on sufficient hands and it was too late for them to escape. He had had the usual flowery-worded handbills distributed around the port and nearby villages. He had sent recruiting parties as far inland as Guildford on the Portsmouth Road, but with small success. And now, as he followed the messenger towards some high gilded doors he knew Undine was still fifty short of her complement. In one thing Bolitho had been more fortunate. Undine ’s previous captain had kept a shrewd eye on his ship’s professional men. Bolitho had taken charge to discover that Undine still carried the hard core of senior men, the warrant officers, a first class sailmaker, and one of the most economical carpenters he had ever watched at work. His predecessor had quit the Navy for good to seek a career in Parliament. Or as he had put it, “I’ve had a bellyful of fighting with iron. From now on, my young friend, I’ll do it with slander!” Rear Admiral Sir John Winslade was standing with his back to a fire, his coat-tails parted to allow the maximum warmth to reach him. Few people knew much about him. He had distinguished himself vaguely in some single-ship action off Brest, and had then been neatly placed inside the Admiralty. There was nothing about his pale, austere features to distinguish him in any way. In fact, he was so ordinary that his gold-laced coat seemed to be wearing him rather than the other way round. Bolitho was twenty-seven and a half years old, but had already held two commands, and knew enough about senior officers not to take them at face value. Winslade let his coat-tails drop and waited for Bolitho to reach him. He held out his hand and said, “You are punctual. It is just as well. We have much to discuss.” He moved to a small lac- quered table. “Some claret, I think.” He smiled for the first time. It was like the sunlight in Whitehall. Frail, and easily removed. He pulled up a chair for Bolitho. “Your health, Captain.” He added, “I suppose you know why I asked for you to be given this command?” Bolitho cleared his throat. “I assumed, sir, that as Captain Stewart was entering politics that you required another for . . .” Winslade gave a wry smile. “ Please, Bolitho. Modesty at the expense of sincerity is just so much top-hamper. I trust you will bear that in mind?” He sipped at his claret and continued in the same dry voice, “For this particular commission I have to be sure of Undine ’s cap- tain. You will be on the other side of the globe. I have to
 know what you are thinking so that I can act on such despatches as I might receive in due course.” Bolitho tried to relax. “Thank you.” He smiled awkwardly. “I mean, for your trust, sir.” “Quite so.” Winslade reached for the decanter. “I know your background, your record, especially in the recent war with France and her Allies. Your behaviour when you were on the American station reads favourably. A full scale war and a bloody rebellion in America must have been a good schoolroom for so young a com- mander. But that war is done with. It is up to us,” he smiled slightly, “ some of us, to ensure that we are never forced into such a helpless stalemate again.” Bolitho exclaimed, “We did not lose the war, sir.” “We did not win it either. That is more to the point.” Bolitho thought suddenly of the last battle. The screams and yells on every side, the crash of gunfire and falling spars. So many had died that day. So many familiar faces just swept away. Others had been left, like the two ragged soldiers, to fend as best they could. He said quietly, “We did our best, sir.” The admiral was watching him thoughtfully. “I agree. You may not have won a war, but you did win a respite of sorts. A time to draw breath and face facts.” “You think the peace will not last, sir?” “An enemy is always an enemy, Bolitho. Only the vanquished know peace of mind. Oh yes, we will fight again, be sure of it.” He put down his glass and added sharply, “Now, about your ship. Are you prepared?” Bolitho met his gaze. “I am still short of hands, but the ship is as ready as she will ever be, sir. I had her warped out of the dock- yard two days ago, and she is now anchored at Spithead awaiting final provisioning.” “How short?” Two words, but they left no room for manoeuvre. “Fifty, sir. But my lieutenants are still trying to gather more.” The admiral did not blink. “I see. Well, it’s up to you. In the meantime I will obtain a warrant for you to take some ‘volunteers’ from the prison hulks in Portsmouth harbour.” Bolitho said, “It’s a sad thing that we must rely on convicts.” “They are men. That is all you require at the moment. As it is, you will probably be doing some of the wretches a favour. Most of ’em were to be transported to the penal colonies in America. Now, with America gone, we will have to look elsewhere for new settle- ments. There is some talk of Botany Bay, in New Holland, but it may be rumour, of course.” He stood up and walked to a window. “I knew your father. I was saddened to hear of his death. While you were in the West Indies, I believe?” He did not wait for a reply. “This mission would have been well cut for him. Something to get his teeth into. Self- dependence, decisions to be made on the spot which could make or break the man in command. Everything a young frigate captain dreams of, right?” “Yes, sir.” He pictured his father as he had last seen him. The very day he had sailed for the Indies in Phalarope. A tired, broken man. Made bitter by his other son’s betrayal. Hugh Bolitho had been the apple of his eye. Four years older than Richard, he had been a born gambler, and had ended in killing a brother officer in a duel. Worse, he had fled to America, to join the Revolutionary forces and later to command a privateer against the British. It had been that knowledge which had really killed Bolitho’s father, no matter what the doctor had said. He tightened his grip on his glass. Much of his prize money had gone into buying back land which his father had sold to pay Hugh’s debts. But nothing could buy back his honour. It was fortunate that Hugh had died. If they had ever met again Bolitho imagined he might kill him for what he had done. “More claret?” Winslade seemed absorbed with his own thoughts. “I’m sending you to Madras. There you will report to . . . well, it will be in your final orders. No sense in idle gossip.” He added, “Just in case you cannot get your ship manned, eh?” “I’ll get them, sir. If I have to go to Cornwall.” “I hope that will not be necessary.” Winslade changed tack again. “During the American campaign you probably noticed that there was little co-operation between military and civilian government. The forces on the ground fought the battles and confided in neither. That must not happen again. The task I am giving you would be better handled by a squadron, with an admiral’s flag for good measure. But it would invite attention, and that Parliament will not tolerate in this uneasy peace.” He asked suddenly, “Where are you staying in London?” “The George at Southwark.” “I will give you an address. A friend’s residence in St. James’s Square.” He smiled at Bolitho’s grave features. “Come, don’t look so gloomy. It is time you made your way in affairs and put the line of battle behind you. Your mission may bring you to eyes other than those of jaded flag officers. Get to know people. It can do nothing but good. I will send a courier with instructions for your first lieutenant.” He darted him a quick glance. “Herrick, I gather. From your last ship.” “Yes, sir.” It sounded like “of course.” There had never been any doubt whom he would ask for if he got another ship. “Well then, Mr. Herrick it is. He can take charge of local matters. I’ll need you in London for four days.” He hardened his tone as Bolitho looked about to protest. “At least!” The admiral regarded Bolitho for several seconds. Craving to get back to his ship, uncertain of himself in these overwhelming surroundings. It was all there and more besides. As Bolitho had entered the room it had been like seeing his father all those long years ago. Tall, slim, with that black hair tied at the nape of his neck. The loose lock which hung above his right eye told another story. Once as he had raised his glass it had fallen aside to display a livid scar which ran high into the hairline. Winslade was glad about his choice. There was intelligence on Bolitho’s grave features, and compassion too, which even his service in seven years of war had not displaced. He could have picked from a hundred captains, but he had wanted one who needed a ship and the sea and not merely the security such things represented. He also required a man who could think and act accordingly. Not one who would rest content on the weight of his broadsides. Bolitho’s record had shown plainly enough that he was rarely content to use written orders as a substitute for initiative. Several admirals had growled as much when Winslade had put his name forward for command. But he had got his way, for Winslade had the weight of Parliament behind him, which was another rarity. He sighed and picked up a small bell from the table. “You go and arrange to move to the address I will give you. I have much to do, so you may as well enjoy yourself while you can.” He shook the bell and a servant entered with Bolitho’s cocked hat and sword. Winslade watched as the man buckled the sword deftly around his waist. “Same old blade, eh?” He touched it with his fingers. It was very smooth and worn, and a good deal lighter than more modern swords. Bolitho smiled. “Aye, sir. My father gave it to me after . . .” “I know. Forget about your brother, Bolitho.” He touched the hilt again. “Your family have brought too much honour for many generations to be brought down by one man.” He thrust out his hand. “Take care. I daresay there are quite a few tongues wagging about your visit here today.” Bolitho followed the servant into the corridor, his mind mov- ing restlessly from one aspect of his visit to another. Madras, another continent, and that sounded like a mere beginning to whatever it was he was supposed to do. Every mile sailed would have its separate challenge. He smiled quietly. And reward. He paused in the doorway and stared at the bustling people and carriages. Open sea instead of noise and dirt. A ship, a living, vital being instead of dull, pretentious buildings. A hand touched his arm, and he turned to see a young man in a shabby blue coat studying him anxiously. “What is it?” The man said quickly, “I’m Chatterton, Captain. I was once second lieutenant in the Warrior, seventy-four.” He hesitated, watching Bolitho’s grave face. “I heard you were commissioning, sir, I was wondering . . .” “I’m sorry, Mr. Chatterton. I have a full wardroom.” “Yes, sir, I had guessed as much.” He swallowed. “I could sign as master’s mate perhaps?” Bolitho shook his head. “It is only seamen I lack, I’m afraid.” He saw the disappointment clouding the man’s face. The old Warrior had been in the thick of it. She was rarely absent from any battle, and men had spoken her name with pride. Now her second lieutenant was waiting like a beggar. He said quietly, “If I can help.” He thrust his hand into his pocket. “Tide you over awhile.” “Thank you, no, sir.” He forced a grin. “Not yet anyway.” He pulled up his coat collar. As he walked away he called, “Good luck, Captain!” Bolitho watched him until he was out of sight. It might have been Herrick, he thought. Any of us. His Majesty’s frigate Undine tugged resentfully at her cable as a stiffening south-easterly wind ripped the Solent into a mass of vicious whitecaps. Lieutenant Thomas Herrick turned up the collar of his heavy watch coat and took another stroll across the quarterdeck, his eyes slitted against a mixture of rain and spray which made the rigging shine in the poor light like black glass. Despite the weather there was still plenty of activity on deck and alongside in the pitching store boats and water lighters. Here and there on the gangways and right forward in the eyes of the ship the red coats of watchful marines made a pleasant change from the mixtures of dull grey elsewhere. The marines were sup- posed to ensure that the traffic in provisions and last moment equipment was one way, and none was escaping through an open port as barter for cheap drink or other favours with friends ashore. Herrick
 grinned and stamped his feet on the wet planking. They had done a lot of work in the month since he had joined the ship. Others might curse the weather, the uncertainties offered by a long voyage, the prospect of hardship from sea and wind, but not he. The past year had been far more of a burden for him, and he was glad, no thankful, to be back aboard a King’s ship. He had entered the Navy when he was still a few weeks short of twelve years old, and these last long months following the signing of peace with France and the recognition of American independence had been his first experience of being away from the one life he understood and trusted. Unlike many of his contemporaries, Herrick had nothing but his own resources to sustain him. He came of a poor family, his father being a clerk in their home town of Rochester in Kent. When he had gone there after paying off the Phalarope and saying his farewell to Bolitho, he had discovered things to be even worse than he had expected. His father’s health had deteriorated, and he seemed to be coughing his life away, day in, day out. Herrick’s only sister was a cripple and incapable of doing much but help her mother about the house, so his homecoming was seen in rather different ways from his own sense of rejection. A friend of his father’s employer had gained him an appointment as mate in a small brig which earned a living carrying general cargo up and down the east coast and occasionally across the channel to Hol- land. The owner was a miserly man who kept the brig so shorthanded that there were barely enough men to work ship, let along handle cargo, load lighters and keep the vessel in good repair. When he had received Bolitho’s letter, accompanied by his commission from the Admiralty charging him to report on board Undine, he had been almost too stunned to realise his good for- tune. He had not seen Bolitho since that one last visit to his home in Falmouth, and perhaps deep inside he had believed that their friendship, which had strengthened in storm and under bloody broadsides, would be no match for peace. Their worlds were, after all, too far apart. Bolitho’s great stone house had seemed like a palace to Herrick. His background, his ancestry of seafaring officers, put him in a different sphere entirely. Herrick was the first in his family to go to sea, and that was the least of their differences. But Bolitho had not changed. When they had met on this same quarterdeck a month ago he had known it with that first glance. It was still there, the quiet sadness, which could give way to something like boyish excitement in the twinkling of an eye. Above all, Bolitho too was pleased to be back, keen to test himself and his new ship whenever a chance offered itself. A midshipman scuttled over the deck and touched his hat. “Cutter’s returning, sir.” He was small, pinched with cold. He had been aboard just three weeks. “Thank you, Mr. Penn. That’ll be some new hands, I hope.” He eyed the boy unsympathetically. “Now smarten yourself, the captain may be returning today.” He continued his pacing. Bolitho had been in London for five days. It would be good to hear his news, to get the order to sail from this bitter Solent. He watched the cutter lifting and plunging across the white- caps, the oars moving sluggishly despite the efforts of the boat’s coxswain. He saw the cocked hat of John Soames, the third lieu- tenant, in the sternsheets, and wondered if he had had any luck with recruits. In the Phalarope Herrick had begun his commission as third lieutenant, rising to Bolitho’s second-in-command as those above him died in combat. He wondered briefly if Soames was already thinking of his own prospects in the months ahead. He was a giant of a man and in his thirtieth year, three years older than Herrick. He had got his commission as lieutenant very late in life, and by a roundabout route, mostly, as far as Herrick could gather, in the merchant service and later as master’s mate in a King’s ship. Tough, self-taught, he was hard to know. A suspicious man. Quite different from Villiers Davy, the second lieutenant. As his name suggested, he was of good family, with the money and proud looks to back up his quicksilver wit. Herrick was not sure of him either, but told himself that any dislike he might harbour was because Davy reminded him of an arrogant midshipman they had carried in Phalarope . Feet thumped on deck and he turned to see Triphook, the purser, crouching through the drizzle, a bulky ledger under his coat. The purser grimaced. “Evil day, Mr. Herrick.” He gestured to the boats alongside. “God damn those thieves. They’d rob a blind man, so they would.” Herrick chuckled. “Not like you pursers, eh?” Triphook eyed him severely. He was stooped and very thin, with large yellow teeth like a mournful horse. “I hope that was not seriously meant, sir? ” Herrick craned over the dripping nettings to watch the cutter hooking on to the chains. God, their oarsmanship was bad. Bolitho would expect far better, and before too long. He snapped, “Easy, Mr. Triphook. But I was merely reminding you. I recall we had a purser in my last ship. A man called Evans. He lined his pockets at the people’s expense. Gave them foul food when they had much to trouble them in other directions.” Triphook watched him doubtfully. “What happened?” “Captain Bolitho made him pay for fresh meat from his own purse. Cask for cask with each that was rotten.” He grinned. “So be warned, my friend!” “He’ll have no cause to fault me, Mr. Herrick.” He walked away, his voice lacking conviction as he added, “You can be certain of that.” Lieutenant Soames came aft, touching his hat and scowling at the deck as he reported, “Five hands, sir. I’ve been on the road all day, I’m fair hoarse from calling the tune of those handbills.” Herrick nodded. He could sympathise. He had done it often enough himself. Five hands. They still needed thirty. Even then it would not allow for death and injury to be expected on any long voyage. Soames asked thickly, “Any more news?” “None. Just that we are to sail for Madras. But I think it will be soon now.” Soames said, “Good riddance to the land, I say. Streets full of drunken men, prime hands we could well do with.” He hesitated. “With your permission I might take a boat away tonight and catch a few as they reel from their damn ale houses, eh?” They turned as a shriek of laughter echoed up from the gun deck, and a woman, her breasts bare to the rain, ran from beneath the larboard gangway. She was pursued by two seamen, both obviously the worse for drink, who left little to the imagination as to their intentions. Herrick barked, “Tell that slut to get below! Or I’ll have her thrown over the side!” He saw the astonished midshipman watching the spectacle with wide-eyed wonder and added harshly, “Mr. Penn! Jump to it, I say!” Soames showed a rare grin. “Offend your feelings, Mr. Herrick?” Herrick shrugged. “I know it is supposed to be the proper thing to allow our people women and drink in harbour.” He thought of his sister. Anchored in that damned chair. What he would give to see her running free like that Portsmouth trollop. “But it never fails to sicken me.” Soames sighed. “Half the bastards would desert otherwise, signed on or not. The romance of Madras soon wears off when the rum goes short.” Herrick said, “What you asked earlier. I cannot agree. It would be a bad beginning. Men taken in such a way would harbour plenty of grievances. One rotten apple can sour a full barrel.” Soames eyes him calmly. “It seems to me that this ship is al- most full of bad apples. The volunteers are probably on the run from debt, or the hangman himself. Some are aboard just to see what they can lay their fingers on when we are many miles from proper authority.” Herrick replied, “Captain Bolitho will have sufficient author- ity, Mr. Soames.” “I forgot. You were in the same ship. There was a mutiny.” It sounded like an accusation. “Not of his making.” He turned on him angrily. “Be so good as to have the new men fed and issued with slop clothing.” He waited, watching the resentment in the big man’s eyes. He added, “Another of our captain’s requirements. I suggest you acquaint yourself with his demands. Life will be easier for you.” Soames strode away and Herrick relaxed. He must not let him get into his skin so easily. But any criticism, or even hint of it, al- ways affected him. To Herrick, Bolitho represented all the things he would like to be. The fact he also knew some of his secret faults as well made him doubly sure of his loyalty. He shook his head. It was stronger even than that. He peered over the nettings towards the shore, seeing the walls of the harbour battery glinting like lead in the rain. Beyond Ports- mouth Point the land was almost hidden in murk. It would be good to get away. His pay would mount up and go towards helping out at home. With his share of prize money, which he gained un- der Bolitho in the West Indies he had been able to buy several small luxuries to make their lot easier until his next return. And when might that be? Two years? It was better never to contemplate such matters. He saw a ship’s boy duck into the rain to turn the hour-glass beside the deserted wheel, and waited for him to chime the hour on the bell. Time to send the working part of the watch below. He grimaced. The wardroom might be little better. Soames under a cloud of inner thought. Davy probing his guard with some new, smart jest or other. Giles Bellairs, the captain of marines, well on the way to intoxication by this time, knowing his hefty sergeant could deal with the affairs of his small detachment. Triphook prob- ably brooding over the issue of clothing to the new men. Typical of the purser. He could face the prospect of a great sea voyage, with each league measured in salt pork and beef, iron-hard biscuit, juice to prevent
 scurvy, beer and spirits to supplement fresh water which would soon be alive in its casks, and all the thousand other items under his control, with equanimity. But one small issue of clothing, while they still wore what they had come aboard in, was too much for his sense of values. He would learn. He grinned into the cold wind. They all would, once Bolitho brought the ship alive. More shouts from alongside, and Penn, the midshipman, called anxiously, “Beg pardon, sir, but I fear the surgeon is in difficulties.” Herrick frowned. The surgeon’s name was Charles Whit- marsh. A man of culture, but one with something troubling him. Most ship’s surgeons, in Herrick’s experience, had been butchers. Nobody else would go to sea and face the horrors of mangled men screaming and dying after a savage battle with the enemy. In peacetime he had expected it might be different. Whitmarsh was a drunkard. As Herrick peered down at the jolly boat as it bobbed and curtsied at the chains, he saw a boatswain’s mate and two seamen struggling to fit the surgeon into a bowline to assist his passage up the side. He was a big man, al- most as large as Soames, and in the grey light his features shone with all the brightness of a marine’s coat. Herrick snapped, “Have a cargo net lowered, Mr. Penn. It is not dignified, but neither is this, by God!” Whitmarsh landed eventually on the gun deck, his hair awry, his face set in a great beaming smile. One of his assistants and two marines lifted him bodily and took him aft below the quarterdeck. He would sleep in his small sickbay for a few hours, and then begin again. Penn asked nervously, “Is he unwell, sir?” Herrick looked at the youth gravely. “A thought tipsy, lad, but well enough to remove a limb or two, I daresay.” He relented and touched his shoulder. “Go below. Your relief will be up soon.” He watched him hurry away and grinned. It was hard to recall that he had been like Penn. Unsure, frightened, with each hour presenting some new sight and sound to break his boy’s illusions. A marine yelled, “Guardboat shovin’ off from the sallyport, sir!” Herrick nodded. “Very well.” That would mean orders for the Undine. He let his gaze move forward between the tall, spiraling masts with their taut maze of shrouds and rigging, the neatly furled canvas and to the bowsprit, below which Undine ’s beautiful, full-breasted figurehead of a water- nymph stared impassively to every horizon. It also meant that Bolitho would be returning. Today. And for Thomas Herrick that was more than enough. 2
FREE OF THE LAND CAPTAIN Richard Bolitho stood in the shelter of the stone wall beside the sallyport and peered through the chilling drizzle. It was afternoon, but with the sky so overcast by low cloud it could have been much later. He was tired and stiff from the long coach ride, and the journey had been made especially irritating by his two jovial companions. Businessmen from the City of London, they had become more loud-voiced after each stop for change of horses and refreshment at the many inns down the Portsmouth road. They were off to France in a packet ship, to contact new agencies there, and so, with luck, expand their trade. To Bolitho if was still hard to accept, just a year back the Channel had been the only barrier between this country and their common enemy. The moat. The last ditch, as some news-sheet had described it. Now it seemed as if it was all forgotten by such men as his traveling companions. It had become merely an irritating delay which made their journey just so much longer. He shrugged his shoulders deeper inside his boat-cloak, suddenly impatient for the last moments to pass, so that he could get back to the ship. The cloak was new, from a good London tailor. Rear Admiral Winslade’s friend had taken him there, and man- aged to do so without making Bolitho feel the complete ignoramus. He smiled to himself despite his other uncertainties. He would never get used to London. Too large, too busy, where nobody had time to draw breath. And noisy. No wonder the rich houses around St. James’s Square had sent servants out every few hours to spread fresh straw on the roadway. The grinding roar of carriage wheels was enough to wake the dead. It had been a beautiful house, his hosts charming, if slightly amused by his questions. Even now, he was still unsure of their strange ways. It was not just enough to live in that fine, fashionable residence, with its splendid spiral staircase and huge chandeliers. To be right, you had to live on the best side of the square, the east side. Winslade’s friends lived there. Bolitho smiled again. They would. Bolitho had met several very influential people, and his hosts had given two dinner parties with that in mind. He knew well enough from past experience that without their help it would have been impossible. Aboard ship a captain was next only to God. In London society he hardly registered at all.

Carrying on until nightfall, you finally stumble upon a hollow where a small pool of fresh water is fed by an underground spring. You gulp down all you can. The next day is uneventful, but the vultures circling above you in the skies are looking increasingly hopeful.

Weme, a broad, well-built man stripped to the
waist and wearing a leather apron puts down the
tongs he has been using and leads you to a large iron
door at one end of the armory. He unlocks it with a
key selected from a large bunch hanging from his belt 
and leads you inside. Looking around the vault, you see row upon row of
racks, heavy with gleaming weapons and polished
armor.

Urging your trusty steed forward,
you gallop through the main gates and leave the
Citadel. Taking the main road south, towards the town
of Havalok which lies two days' ride away, you pass
through well-cultivated fields and pleasant hills.

After traveling for several hours, you catch sight of a horse and rider galloping along a track that runs from the east, parallel to the edge of the dark forest that is still a long way off in the distance. It looks as if the horseman's course will intercept yours if you continue at your present speed.

By dusk your makeshift army is ready, wielding crude weapons and pitchforks. Several have been drinking and they sing to keep their spirits up. You march at the head of the mob. Soon the outpost comes into sight.

You ride through the boulder-strewn wilderness. A cold wind whips across the bleak grey highlands, making you shiver at its touch. The landscape becomes odd-looking and the track leads you past the half-buried bones of some leviathan from a bygone age. And then you see it. Set into the side of a rocky hillock are two great stone doors, flanked by the statues of two armored warriors: the Shrine of the Templars. You dismount and approach the doors. A deep, booming voice makes you start, echoing out across the barren hilltops.

The great vessel skirts the warm Stream of Zephyrs and, after some days, turns south-west past the coast of the Frozen Lands. But on the margins of the warm sea flows, fogs begin to spring up as you head for Tower Island itself.

After many days at sea, your vessel is within five kilometers of Tower Island itself. Even from that distance you can see the great towered mass of Castle Argent rising into the leaden skies just beyond the shoreline. The galley can go no further in the shallow bay, so you take your belongings into a stout rowing boat being lowered for you.

The castle has a central keep, with east and west wings, and on the side of the castle furthest from where you are stands the northern most Great Tower, rising to a spire among swooping seagulls.
